

--- Page 1 ---

KHORDEH AVESTA

Comprising

Ashem, Yatha, the five Nyayeshes, the five Gahs,
Vispa Humata, Nam Setayeshne, Patet Pashemanee,
all the Nirangs, Bajs, and Namaskars,
and sixteen Yashts

TRANSLITERATED
AND
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH

With Copious Explanatory Notes
Prepared by
Prof. Ervad MANECK FURDOONJI KANGA M.A.
from the Gujarati original
Khordeh-Avesta-Ba-Mayeni
of
Ervad KAVASJI EDULJI KANGA.
(first Edition published in 1880
and Thirteenth edition in 1976.)
FIRST EDITION IN ENGLISH

1362 A.Y. — 1993 A.C.
Corrected edition 1382 A.Y.— 2014 A.C.


--- Page 2 ---

First Edition in English 1362 A.Y. — 1993 A.C. published by The Trustees
of the Parsi Panchayat Funds and Properties, 209, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji
Road, Fort, Bombay — 400 001. Printed by: Jenaz Printers, Bombay. Tel. 261
2853

Revised 2014 to correct printer’s errors
RS: May 30, 2021 fixed typos.
avesta.org, Kasson MN USA.

ISBN 978-1-304-36505-7



--- Page 3 ---

FOREWORD

The Khordeh Avesta, with text and translation in Gujarati, had been pre-
pared in the year 1880 A. D. by the celebrated Avesta scholar, the late Ervad
Kavasji Edulji Kanga. This work is known as Khordeh Avesta Ba-Mayeni.
The value and the utility of this book could be perceived from the fact that
even after more than a century, it has remained a standard work in the Parsi
community for the purpose of prayers, and as well among the scholars as an
indispensable reference book. The demand has been such that it has
subsequently been published into thirteen editions.

In recent times, however, it has been noticed that a fairly large number of
Zoroastrians have been migrating to the Western countries, and hence have
difficulty in following the Gujarati language. Moreover, the younger genera-
tion in India are also nowadays not familiar with the Gujarati language. A
serious need was felt, therefore, to have a Khordeh Avesta in English on the
lines of the Khordeh-Avesta Ba-Mayeni in Gujarati by the late Ervad K. E.
Kanga.

The Trustees of the Bombay Parsi Punchayet entrusted the work of ren-
dering the said Gujarati Khordeh-Avesta Ba-Mayeni into an English version
(text in Roman script with English translation) to the well-known scholar of
Iranology, Prof. Ervad Maneck Furdoonji Kanga who had completed this
work diligently, but did not live for his work to see the light of day, as he
passed way in October, 1988. For the proof-reading and correction of this
publication, thanks are due to Ervad Ratanshah Rustomji Motafram who is
the Head-Master of the M. F. Cama Athornan Institute, Andheri, and an eru-
dite scholar of Avesta Pahlavi.

The Trustees of the Bombay Parsi Punchayet have great pleasure in pub-
lishing this invaluable book and presenting the same in the service of the
Parsi Community.

Dr. Aspi F. Golwalla,

Chairman,

Board of Trustees,

Parsi Punchayet Funds and Properties,
Bombay.

Bombay, 15" January, 1993.


--- Page 4 ---

FOREWORD TO 2013 CORRECTED EDITION

The English edition of Ervad Kangaji’s popular classic was first printed
in 1993. Unfortunately, the printed edition has since become very scarce. Ten
years later, it was digitised and put on the avesta.org web site through the
tireless efforts of Ervad Soli Dastur. It quickly became one of the most
viewed and downloaded documents on the website — currently over 300,000
times — a staggering amount in view of the small number of practising
Zoroastrians.

In 2011, in view of its popularity, and the fact that “the Parsees look upon
Ervad Kanga’s editions as the standard prayer-books in point of pronunci-
ation,” I undertook the task of preparing an ebook version of the classic,
which could be viewed on smart phones and tablets. At the same time I took
the opportunity to correct the frequent printer’s errors which that edition
suffered from. Most of the corrections are based on the Gujarati edition, or
obvious spelling errors. For those who are interested, a list of the corrections
can be found at http://www.avesta.org/kanga/ka_english_kanga_errata.pdf.

Given the technical difficulties, it has taken nearly two years to complete
the task. I am sure the scanning process has introduced new defects, and I
welcome all feedback so I can make further corrections.

JHP, avesta.org
March 7, 2013


--- Page 5 ---

PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION OF THE
KHORDEH AVESTA-BA-MAYENI

The oldest Zoroastrian religious scripture, as preserved at present, is
known as the Avesta. A section of this Avesta is known as the “Khordeh
Avesta” which means the “Smaller (i.e. Selected) Avesta”. This is the book
of daily prayers of the Zoroastrians. It is a cherished possession of every de-
voted Zoroastrian household. The Khordeh Avesta is a collection of prayers
selected from other major works of extant Avesta literature such as Yasna,
Vispered, Vendidad, and the Yasht Literature. For instance, the Atash
Nyayesh is taken from Yasna chapter 62, and the Avan Ardvisur Nyayesh is
taken from Yasna chapter 65, and so on.

The book “Khordeh Avesta’, therefore, contains daily prayers including
the Kusti prayers, Hoshbam, Five Gahs, Five Nyayeshes (praise, litany), the
Afringan (benedictions, blessings) containing invocatory prayers and bless-
ings dedicated to Ardafravash, Dahman, Srosh, Gahambar, Gatha,
Rapithwin, etc., besides some prayers in Pazend.

The “Khordeh Avesta,” intended for the use of the devotees, is a collec-
tion of the forms of prayers most required by them at various seasons and in
the various circumstances of their lives. As such, it is not a book of uniform
content and fixed arrangement. Thus, all the Yashts are also included in the
“Tamam Khordeh Avesta;” but because of the convenience of printing facil-
ities, only a few Yashts, known as the shorter Yashts, and also those which
the publisher considers as being necessary or popular, are generally included
in the Khordeh Avesta. The Hormazd Yasht, the Ardibehesht Yasht, the Srosh
Yasht Hadokht, the Srosh Yasht Vadi, the smaller Hom and Vanant Yashts,
Haftan Yasht, and the Bahram Yasht are generally included. However, differ-
ent editions contain a varying number of Yashts. For the convenience of the
devotees, even the Five Gathas of the Holy Prophet Zarathushtra, which
form a part of the Yasna section, are included in some of the editions of the
Khordeh Avesta.

Zoroastrians recite their prayers in Avesta which is a sacred language.
Among several words for “prayers” in Avesta, one is called “manthra’”,
which means “thought (force), word, holy word”. It is similar to the Sanskrit
“mantra”, and the Sanskrit translation is rendered as “manthravani” which is
also significantly called “adesha”: “Divine Command”.

Among other Avesta words for “prayer”, the “Manthra” therefore, occu-
pies a very important position, According to the Yasna Chapter 29.7 (Gatha
Ahunavaiti), “manthra” is the Holy Word of Divine Origin, and the Holy
Word of Ahura Mazda. One of the collections of these “manthras” is known
as “Manthra Spenta” in Avesta which means “the Holy, beneficent Word”,
and which is “effective and full of glory”. It is stated in the Fravardin Yasht

iii


--- Page 6 ---

iv KHORDEH AVESTA

(paragraph 81) that “Manthra Spenta is the soul of Ahura Mazda”.

According to Hormazd Yasht, the Holy Names of Ahura Mazda men-
tioned therein, form a section of the Manthra Spenta.

In Siruze Yasht, in the “Khshnuman” (propitiatory formula) of the
Manthra Spenta (Marespand), it is stated: “We revere the much glorious
Manthra Spenta, we revere the law against the demons, we revere the creed
of Zarathushtra, we revere the long-standing traditions, we revere the good
Mazdayasni Religion”. These are some of the foundational beliefs of the
Zoroastrian religion.

Avesta being a sacred language, it is incumbent upon every Zoroastrian
to recite his/her prayers in Avesta. At the same time, any person would like
to learn about the general meanings of the prayers which he/she recites. For
this, there are several translations available in different languages though
very often, such translations do not bring out the spirit of the original.

In the year 1880 A.C. then, a pioneering work in this field was carried out
by the celebrated Avesta scholar, the late Ervad Kavasji Edulji Kanga, of
revered memory. He brought out a translation of the Khordeh Avesta in Gu-
jarati in a scholarly and systematic manner, transliterating and translating
each paragraph simultaneously, and giving a number to each word for the be-
nefit of the readers following the translation with accuracy. He also gave
footnotes, wherever necessary, in the light of modern research based on
philology. This work is known as the Khordeh Avesta-Ba-Mayeni: “Khordeh
Avesta with meanings”.

The late Ervad Kavasji Kanga was an inspired soul. Not only did he
bring out this translation of the Khordeh Avesta, but he went on to accom-
plish the monumental task of translating the entire Avesta scriptures avail-
able to us at present, besides bringing out an Avesta-English-Gujarati dic-
tionary, and also a treatise on Avesta grammar.

Though a century has now elapsed, this translation of Khordeh Avesta
has stood the test of time, and has remained a standard and authentic piece of
literary work, both for the scholars and for the laity. As many as thirteen edi-
tions of this translation-work have been brought out successively, the last
one being in 1976.

The original translation of the Khordeh Avesta by Ervad Kavasji Kanga
was in the Gujarati language. Even though there is much demand for work of
this kind and utility, readership in the Gujarati language is gradually dimin-
ishing in the Parsi community, particularly among the younger generation, as
well as among a very large number of those who have migrated to Western
Countries in recent years. Though some English translations of the Khordeh
Avesta have been attempted, and are available, a great need has been felt for
an English version of Kangaji’s classic Gujarati translation of the Khordeh


--- Page 7 ---

PREFACE v

Avesta.

The Trustees of the Parsi Punchayat of Bombay therefore took upon
themselves to carry out this fundamental duty, and decided to get the Gujar-
ati translation of Khordeh Avesta-Ba-Mayeni of Ervad K. E. Kanga rendered
into English. This task they then entrusted to another celebrated scholar of
international repute, namely, the late Prof. Ervad Maneck Furdoonji Kanga,
who was incidentally a relative of the late Ervad Kavasji Kanga. Prof. M. F.
Kanga has written innumerable articles on Iranian subjects for various journ-
als, books, memorial and commemorative volumes throughout the scholarly
world.

The terms of reference of this work entrusted to Prof. M. F. Kanga were
to carry out a faithful word-by-word translation into English language from
the original Gujarati of Ervad K. E. Kanga, and also to include the text in the
Roman script, without any alteration. Prof. M. F. Kanga completed the work
with meticulous care and brought to bearing on it his vast knowledge and ex-
perience. By Divine Grace, Prof. M. F. Kanga not only carried out this work,
but also transliterated and translated into English Kavasji Kanga’s two other
works, namely, Gatha-Ba-Mayeni and Yasht-Ba-Mayeni before his sad de-
mise in October 1988 at the age of 80 years.

The Trustees of the Parsi Punchayat of Bombay deserve to be compli-
mented for the publication of this work, and it is earnestly hoped that they
will also authorise the publication as early as possible, of the two other
works, namely, Gatha-Ba-Mayeni and Yasht-Ba-Mayeni, completed by the
late Prof. M. F. Kanga, for the benefit of the Parsi Community.

Ervad Dr. Rooyintan Peshotan Peer
Jt. Principal,
M. F. Cama Athornan Institute,
Andheri
Bombay,
1* January, 1993.

PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION

The last edition of this book was published in January 1926. Since then
various small Avesta prayer-books were published by cheap-rate dealers.
Nevertheless there was a demand as usual for the present edition make by
the co-religionists which proves still the high degree of their zeal and devo-
tion for the recital of Avesta prayers in correct orthography and for under-
standing the sense thereof.

There may be numerous editions of prayer-books with incorrect pronun-
ciations prevalent among the Parsees, yet the demand for Ervad Kavasji
Kanga’s publications with correct pronunciation has remained constant, inas-


--- Page 8 ---

vi KHORDEH AVESTA

much as the Parsees look upon Ervad Kanga’s editions as the Standard pray -
er-books in point of pronunciation.

The final proofs of the last edition of this book as well as of recent edi-
tions of Yasht Ba Maeni and Gatha Ba Maeni of my late revered grandfather
were gone through by our well-known Avesta Pahlavi scholar Ervad Bomani
Naserwanji Dhabhar, M. A. who has always obliged me by his help. This
time he was not able to help me owing to cataracts in his eyes. Another
Avesta Pahlavi scholar was approached by me who willingly complying with
my request at the sacrifice of his time went through all the final proofs of
this edition, for which act of his courtesy and kindness my thanks are due to
him.

Navrost Pesutony Kavasi Kanca. Bomsay, August 1936.

PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION

The first edition of my Khordeh Avesta was issued in 1880 and the last in
1896. The rapid sale commanded by those editions is an unmistakable proof
of the general desire on the part of my co-religionists to recite their prayers
according to the correct and authenticated texts and to know their meaning.
In placing this fifth edition before the public, I have thoroughly examined
the texts and interpretations given in my former editions, and made altera-
tions and modifications, where necessary, in the light of my continued stud-
ies. The present revised edition has been enlarged by the addition of the
Sirozah Yasht, the Afringans and the Pazend Nirang recited at times after the
prayers, and a Monajat by the late Moolla Feeroz with their translations.

Kavasn Eparst Kanca. Bompay, February, 1902.

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

This, the fourth edition of my Khordeh Avesta has been enlarged by the
addition of two new Yashts, viz. Khorshed and Mah and the Avesta and
Pazend chapter (Kardéh), recited in memory of departed relatives, has been
inserted with its translation. The translation and notes throughout have been
carefully revised in the light of further study and research. I have carefully
perused the latest edition of Professor Darmesteter’s French version of the
Avesta, and gleaned from it useful matters and inserted it in this work in the
shape of footnotes. The passages of the Gathas, occurring in the Khordeh
Avesta, have been reproduced in the form of verse. Besides, many other mat-
ters which can suitably find a place in a work of this kind have been added.
In short, an earnest endeavour has been made to improve and enlarge the
work and bring it up to date. With a view, however, to place it within the
reach of all classes of my coreligionists, no increase has been made in the
price of the book, which, as in the case of the last two editions, has been


--- Page 9 ---

PREFACE vii

fixed at Rs. 2-8 ans, per copy.

I beg to acknowledge the obligation I owe to the esteemed Trustees of the
Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy Translation Fund for their support by subscribing
for sixty copies of this Work.

Kavasn Epatm Kanca. Bomsay, March, 1896.

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

The rapid sale, in the short space of two years and a half of the second
edition revised and enlarged of this Work affords evidence at once satisfact-
ory and gratifying of the utility and appreciation of the book, and of the
growing taste for a correct and intelligent reciting of prayers among the Parsi
community. In the present edition, two Yashts, viz., Tir and Gosh have been
added to the ten given in the second edition; the number of Yashts in this edi-
tion being thus twelve in all.

I may add that, following the new edition of the Avesta Texts published
by Dr. Karl F. Geldner, I have altered, in many places, certain Avestaic
words, which appeared to me in the course of my study of that book to admit
of corrections; and with the view of affording facility of reference to Avesta
students, I have numbered the paragraphs in my text and translation as Dr.
Geldner’s text. The translation has also, in some places, undergone revisions
and improvements, suggested by further study and consideration of the
Avesta literature.

Kavasn Epaust Kanca. Bompay, July, 1890.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

The first edition of this Khordeh Avesta was issued in 1880. To judge
from the favourable reception accorded to it, (a thousand copies having been
sold off and a new issue called for ), the work may be assumed to have sup-
plied a want and to be well adapted to the needs of the community for which
it was intended. * * * Passages of Avesta and Pazend, which were omitted in
the first edition, after they had been once cited, have been repeated in the
present issue, on every occasion on which they recur. This and the addition
of three Yashts has somewhat increased the bulk of the volume; yet the price
has been greatly reduced, in order to place it within the reach of all sections
of the community.

Kavasn Epatst Kanca. Bombay, December, 1887.

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

More than 60 years ago a translation of the Khordeh Avesta was for the
first time published by the late Dustoor Framji Sorabji Meherji Rana. A few


--- Page 10 ---

viii KHORDEH AVESTA

months later on another translation of the same was issued by the late Dus-
toor Edalji Dorabji Sanjana. These translations did not materially differ from
each other; but for all practical purposes, the latter, up till now, has been
most in use — it having passed in the meantime through several editions with
but few important alterations. Thanks, however, to the rapid, but immensely
satisfactory, progress made in comparative philology during the last half cen-
tury by the indefatigable savants of Europe, considerable light has been
thrown, not only on the ancient Zoroastrian religion, but on the interpretation
of many a difficult passage in the Zend Avesta. Facts unknown before and
excellences quite buried in obscurity have, by its aid, been brought to the
surface; while some portion of the Zend Avesta, so ambiguous before, has
been correctly interpreted and translated into Gujarati.* These made the want
of a translation of the Khordeh Avesta, according to the most correct rules of
grammar and philology, keenly felt; and I therefore undertook to supply it, at
the suggestion of many educated and intelligent Zoroastrians.

The whole of the translation is based on Professor Westergaard’s excel-
lent Zend text. This it was at first intended to publish in Zend characters, but
being aware of the inability of a great portion of my co-religionists to peruse
it in Zend, I deemed it expedient to abandon the original intention, and make
the Work more convenient and accessible by transliterating the original text
into correct Gujarati. In so doing, I have had to undergo the trouble and ex-
pense of getting cast some letters, the corresponding ones for which were not
to be found in the Gujarati alphabet.

The text is divided into a number of convenient paragraphs, and each
paragraph has subjoined to it, its translation; and to prevent confusion types
in black pica have been throughout employed for the text and ordinary pica
for the translation. In the translation the two-fold end is observed of making
it useful both to Zend students and to general readers. It is kept, as much as
practicable, close to the text, each word of which is distinguished by a num-
ber, corresponding with that placed over its translation immediately below.
Words not occurring in the original, but necessary to complete the sense of
the translation, are placed in parentheses. In many cases the substance of one
or more paragraphs is summarized by way of explanation and placed below
the literal translation.

Besides the correct text and its translation referred to above, the follow-
ing important points are attended to:- (1) Careful attention is paid to punctu-
ation, for want of which gross mistakes often arise. (2) Zend text is, in order
to avoid confusion, separated and pointed out distinctly from the Pazend

a (1) Vendidad translated into Gujarati with explanatory notes, and a complete philological and
grammatical glossary of all the words contained in the texts by Kavasji Edalji Kanga (K. R.
Cama’s Prize Essay). (2) Ten yashts, translated by Dustoor Eruchji Sorabji Meherji Rana and
Ervad Muncherji Shapoorji Vachha. (3) Aban Yasht, translated by Ervad Tehmulji Dinshaw
Ankleshvaria.


--- Page 11 ---

PREFACE ix

text, and the text composed at a later period. (3) Special care is taken to point
out the passages taken from the Yasna, Vispered, and Vendidad. (4) Pazend
passages are, as far as practicable, compared with their corresponding Zend
passages. (5) Subjects cursorily treated in the Khordeh Avesta, but discussed
at great length elsewhere, are here amplified with fuller information from
other sources. (6) Technical terms of Zoroastrian ceremonials and ethics,
such as hom, jeevam, barsam, zor, chinvat bridge, &c, are fully explained.
(7) Passages treating of the excellence and efficacy of the prayers Yatha and
Ashem are culled and fully explained. (8) Pahlavi translation is sometimes
indented upon, as in the case of Atash Nyayesh. (9) References to parallel
Zend passages, as in the case of the translation of Patet Pashemani which is
wholly in Pazend, are given with their meanings and explanations; and in
several places, where it was found necessary, additional information from
Pahlavi commentators is given in footnotes. (10) Certain ceremonials,
required to be observed in several places during prayers, are explained. (11)
Requisite information is given about the Gahambars and their proper
seasons, on the authority of the Avesta. (12) The Pazend Confession of Faith,
which is generally recited at the end of the prayers, is substituted by a far
better one, and that too found in Zend, which, I trust, will be appreciated by
my co-religionists. This Confession of Faith constitutes the twelfth Ha of
Yasna.

In conclusion, I offer my deep and most grateful thanks to Mr.
Khurshedjee Rustomjee Cama, our respected citizen and well-known orient-
al scholar, and my own learned preceptor. With that kindness and good
nature which are so characteristic of him, and which have invariably won
him the esteem and affection of his private pupils, he has most cordially
rendered me, in the preparation of this Work, as in that of my previous ones,
very valuable assistance. My obligations are due to him also for his many
sensible and practical suggestions for the improvement of this Work.

Lastly, I trust to the indulgence of the reader to overlook any inaccuracies
or defects which may have crept in the translation, notwithstanding all the
care and attention conscientiously bestowed on it. A list of the several orient-
al works which proved useful to me during the progress of the Work is given
elsewhere.

Kavasst Evatt KANnca. Bompay, April 1880.

(This preface was written by late Ervad K.E. Kanga for the first Edition
Published in Gujarati.)


--- Page 12 ---

Ervad KAVASJI EDULJI KANGA

Translator of the Vendidad, the Yasna, and the Vispered, the Yashts and
the Gathas;
Author of
A Practical Avesta Grammar and of

A Complete Dictionary of the Avesta Language
(both Avesta into English and English into Avesta).

Fellow of the University of Bombay,
Head Master, Mulla Feroze Madressa.


--- Page 13 ---

CONTENTS

FOREWORD... cecccesesceseseeseseeseseeseseeseneeseseesesceseeceseeeeseeaeaeeaeeeeaeeeeaeeesaeereeeeas 1
FOREWORD TO 2013 CORRECTED EDITION... cceceeceeseeseeteeeeeeeeens ii
PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION OF THE KHORDEH AVESTA-
BA-MAYENT .oescscscscssssessssssssesessesesesessesesesesesseseseseseeseseseseeseueseseseseseseseaeeeeseseseas ill
PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION. ........cececcecesseseseeseneeseeneeneeeneaes Vv
PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. ......0.. cececssesseseeseseeeeseeeeseeeeseeeeseeaeeaes vi
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION. .........ccccceceseseeeeeeeeeeseneeneeeeeeaeeaes vi
PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION... ccc ceceseeseseeseeeesceeeseeeeseeeeseeeeneens vil
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION... cceceseeseseeeeseeeeneeeeteeeeteeeeeeeens vil
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION... ceceseeeseeseseeceeeeseeeeseeeeseeeeneeees vil
A note on the Reading and Pronunciation of the Avesta............::ceeeeeees XIV
GLOSSARY... cecescesescsseseeseseeeeseeeeseeeeseeecaesecseceeaeeecneeeeseeseneeaeaeceseeaeceteteaeeas xiv
ASHEM VOHU Qu... cecsccsssessssssssesesseseseseseesescseseseseseseseesesesesesceesesesesneeaeseseaeeees 1
AHUNAVAR (YATHA AHU VAIRYO)......ccccsscsescsseseseseeseseseseeneneseseseeneeneaes 2
NIRANG-I-GOMEZ MALIDAN..u.c.ccccccssssssesesssseseseseeseseseseeeseseseeneesesesseseaees 2
KEM-NA MAZDA... ceccscscssssesesssseseseseeseseseseseseseseseaeseseseseeeseseseseeneseseseaneneaees 3
HORMAZD KHODAY .......cceececcesesseseeeseseeseseeseseeseseesenecsceeeaeeeaeeeeaeeaeeeeeaeeaees 5
JASA ME AVANGHE MAZDA... ccecesseseseeseseesesseseneesceeeseeeeaceeseeeeseeeeeaeenes 6
BAZ (PRAYER) FOR SAYING GRACE .....c.cccscssssesessssssesesesseseseseseseseeeesesens 7
BAZ TO BE RECITED BEFORE PASSING URINE AND ANSWERING
THE CALL OF NATURE ....... cceccssesssseseeseseeeseeeeseeeseeecseeecseneeseeeseeaeeneeeeeeaeens 7
FIVE GAHS TO BE RECITED SEPARATELY.........cecceceseseesetseseteceseeaeenees 8
SROSH BAZ... ccececceescesesceseseeseseeceseeseseeseseeseseesceeeseeeeseeeaeeeeneeeeeeaeeneeeeeeaeeatens 9
AHMAI RAESHCHA WL... ccccscssesesseseseseeceseseseseeseseseseesesesesecceseseseseseseseseeeesenens 12
HAZANGHREM. ......csecccescssesesseseseeseseesceceseeeeaeeecaesecseeeeseeeeaeeeeaeeeeaeeseeeeeeeaees 12
JASA ME AVANGHE MAZDA... ccecescesesseeeseeeeseeeeseeseseeseseeseneeeeeeeaeeaeeaees 13
KERFEH MOZD.\.u.. cc eeeccesesseseseeseseeceseeceseescsescseesenecaeeesaeeeeaeeesaeeeeaesaeeeeeeaees 13
HOSHBAM.......cecccsssscssssssesesesseseseseevesesesesseseseseseeseseseseseeeseseseeescseseseneseeeesenens 14
KHORSHED NYAYESH..w... cc eececcecssesseseeeseeeeseeeeaceeeaeeecaeeseeaecaeeeeeaeeeeeeees 17
MEHER NYAYESH (un... cecscssssessssesesesescesesesesesescseseesesesesecceseseseseseseseseseesenens 28
VISPA HUMATA......eccceccscesessesescescseeseseeseseescneesceeeaeeeesenesaeeecaeeeeseeeaeeeeaeeaeaees 32
DOA NAM SETAYESHNE.......ccscssssssssesessesesesesceeseseseeceseseseseensseseseeneeaeaeees 33
HOMAGE FOR THE FOUR DIRECTIONS ........ccecessesesseseseeeeteeeeeeeeeeeeaees 36
MAH BOKHTAR NYAYESH......cecscssssesssseseseseseeescseseecescseseseeneseseseeseeaeseees 37
ARDVI SURA NYAYESH,Q....cccccssssesssssseseseeseseseseeescsesescenesesesesneneaeesseseseaees 41
ATASH NYAYESH Louw .ccscscsessssssesessescseseseeseseseseesesesesesesueseseseseeeseseecseseseneaees 49
HAVAN GAH Luo. eccccccscssssssesessesesesesesesesesesseseseseseseseseseseseseseseeneseaeseseeneneneeees 58
RAPITHWAN GAH... ceccessssesessssssesesssseseseseseseseseesesesesesceeuesesesneeaecesseseaeaees 62
UZIRIN GAH Luu. cecccccccescssssssesessssesesesessesesesesseseseseseeseseseseseeesesesesnenenecseseseneeees 64
ATWISRUTHREM GAH... cecscssessssssssesesessesesesescesescseseeeseseseseeneseseseeneneaeneees 67
USHAHEN GAH. cccccccssescsssseseseesescsesesesseseseseseseseseseeneseseseseeneseseseeneseaeseees 71
PATET (AVESTA)......ccccccecesseceseeeeseeecseeeeseeceseeecseeseaeeseaecscsecaceesaeeeeeaeeaeeneeaees 73

xi


--- Page 14 ---

xii KHORDEH AVESTA

PATET PASHEMANL........ccccccsscsseseeseseeeeseeeeseeecseeeaceseseecaeeeeaeeseneceeeeeaeeaeeaees 74
HOMAGE UNTO A LAMP... ceeccsseseseeceseeseeeeseeeeeeeeeaceeeseeecaeeecaecaeeneeeaeentens 88
HOMAGE UNTO FRAVARTIKAN.....c.cccssssssssssssesesessesescesesecsesecasecscseeseas 88
HOMAGE UNTO DAKHMA — TOWER OF SILENCE .........:ccccccsseeseees 89
HOMAGE UNTO MOUNTAING. .......cccescssescseeseteesceeeseeeseeeeseeeeseeseeaeeaeeeeees 89
HOMAGE UNTO WATERS. ........ceccssssesseseeeeseseceeeeeeeesseeeseeecaeeaeeeeneesaeeaeens 89
HOMAGE UNTO PLANTS .......cecccsesesseeesseeeseeeeseeceseeseneeseseeseneeeceeeaeeeeaeeeeaees 89
BAZ OF RECITING ASHEM VOHU 1200.......cccccscscsssesssssesessseessseeseseseees 90
YAZISHN HA XX known as FRAMRAOT......c.cccscsccsssssessesescsenscseecsssesees 91
BAZ OF RECITING YATHA AHU VAIRYO 1200.......ccccccccccssesssstseseteees 93
NAMES OF THE DAYS AND MONTH. ........cccccsssssesseseeseseeseesseseeseeeeseees 96
Description of the Jashans of Twelve Months...........cccceesceeseeseeeeesteeeeneeeeees 98
NAMES OF SEVEN HAMKARS - COLABORATEURG.........:cccceeseeees 100
NAMES OF 12 YAZATAS OF HAMAYASHT........c.ccccssssssessseteseteseteseeees 100
NAMES OF 21 NASKS uo. cccececcecesceeesceeeseeeeseeeeseeeeseeeeseeseneeseneeeeeeeeaeeneeenees 101
YASHT SS... ececescsseseeeseseeseseeseeeesenecseeecaesesseeecaeecseeeseeeeseeeeneeseeeseeeeseeaeeeeenas 103
HORMAZD YASHT.......ccececsescsseseseeseseeseseescseeceneeceeeceesecaeeeeaeceeeeeesaeeeeneeeas 103
NIRANG OF HORMAZD YASHT.......cccccceccssessesseseeseeseeseeseeseeseeseseesseeneeens 114
HAFTAN YASHT LARGE... ccceccesesceseseeseseeseseeceseeceseeeeeeeseeeeaeeeeseeeeaeeeeaes 115
ARDIBEHESHT YASHT....0....cccccceccssesesseseeseseeecseeeeacecseeecaeeeeseeecaeeeceaeeaeens 131
NIRANG OF ARDIBEHESHT YASHT.........cccccccessesseceeseesseeseeeseeeseeeseeenes 138
KHORDAD YASHT......cccscssssssesessesesesescesescsescesesesesesneneseseseeceusseseseeneneaeseees 139
KHORSHED YASHT 0... ceececcesesseseseeecseeeeseeceseeecseeceneeseseeeeeecaceeeaeeeeacereeaeens 144
MAH YASHT.......eeescesesseseseeeeseescseeeeseeceseeceseeseneeceeeeaeeesaeeeeaeeecseeeeesseeaeeneenes 146
TIR YASHT 0... ccececcesesceseseesesceeeseeeeseeeeseeseseeseeeaeeeaeeeeaeeeeseeeeseeeenaeeneeereeaeens 148
GOSH YASH... eeecescesessesceseseeeeseeeeseeeeseeeeseeseseeseneeaeeesaeeeeseeeeaeeeeseeeeeeeaeens 171
SROSH YASHT HADOKHT.......ccccccccssessssssesesesseseseseseeseseseseeceeseseseeensesens 182
NIRANG OF SROSH YASHT HADOKHT......c.cccccccccsssssssssescsesssseseesesees 192
SROSH YASHT VADL..u...cccceccsceesseseseeseeeeseseeseseeseeeeaeeeseeeeaeeeeeeeeaeeaeeneeeaes 192
NIRANG OF SROSH YASHT VADL.....ccccccccseeesceseeseeseeeeseeseeseeseeeeeeeeaes 204
FARVARDIN YASH... cccceccssesessesesseseeeeseeeseeeeaeeeeseeeeseeeeeceeaeseeeeeeeaeeatens 205
BEHERAM YASHT..u...cceccccecescesesseseseeseseeseseeseneceeeesaeeecacecaeeecaeeeeaeceeeeeeeaeens 261
HOM YASHT LARGE .......ccccecessssesseseseeeeseescseeeeseeceneeeeseeaeseeaeeeeeeeeseeeeseeaeens 286
HOM YASHT SMALL... cceeecsceceseeseeeeseeeeseeeseeecaeeecaeecaeeeeseeeeseeeeseeeeeaeeas 302
NIRANG OF HOM YASHT......ccecceccscescesesceceseeecseeecseeeeseeecaeeeeaeeeeeeseneeeeeees 304
VANANT YASHT. 0. ececcecesceseseeseseeseseeseeessesceseeeeseeeseeeseeeeseeeeeaeeaeeeeeeaeentens 304
NIRANG OF VANANT YASHT......cccecessssseseeseeseeeceseneesecseesecsecsecsesseeseenes 306
SIROZA YASHT..o...cccccssssssescssesesesessssesesesessescseseeseseseseseecesesesesescseseseseeeeeees 307

KARDA TO BE RECITED IN MEMORY OF THE DEPARTED ONES. .319
A BRIEF AND INFORMATIVE SYNOPSIS OF THE ABOVE
MENTIONED PAZEND PORTION TO BE RECITED IN BAZ — LOW

DOA TANDAROSTI (IN AVESTA).....csessesessesesseseesesesseseseceeeneeeeneenseeeeneees 326
DOA TANDAROSTI (IN PAZEND)......c:scssesesseseseesessesesseseeeeseseseeneneneneneees 328


--- Page 15 ---

CONTENTS xiii

DIN-NO KALAMO (in Avesta) - THE ZOROASTRIAN CREED (Yasna Ha

12). eeeeeceecceccecceeceeceeseesecseeseesessesseeseescecuaeseeseceeceessecsecsecsessesseesessesseeneeeeeessaes 329
A SHORT SYNOPSIS OF DIN-NO KALAMO (i.e. THE ZOROASTRIAN
CREED)... ceceeceecessssessessesseesessescsceseeseesceseesecaeesessesaeeseeaeesesaeaeeeseeseeeeaeesaeens 332
DIN-NO KALAMO, THE ZOROASTRIAN CREED.......c.cccescssseseseeeeees 332
NIRANG TO BE RECITED AFTER THE RECITATION OF NYAYESH
AND YASHT ue eceeeccesceseseceececeeecececeeeeecaecseesesaessesaesaesaesaesaeeseeesaeeneeeneesaes 333
LOL NAMES... ceeecescsessessesseeseeseeececceececeesecsecseesessessessesatesseesaeesaesenees 334
MONAJAT to be recited any time.....c.ccccccccccccccsescsescscscscscsescscscsescsescsesesees 337
MONAJAT IN PRAISE OF THE HOLY CREATOR.........cccessseseseseeeseees 340
MONAJAT IN PRAISE OF THE HOLY PROPHET ZARTOSHT............. 341
Farvardin Yasht to be recited along with the Kardah of “Stum” in the sacred
memory of the souls of the departed ONES...........cceeeeseeceeteesseeeteeeeteeeeteeeees 343

The famous kardah of yatu zt Zarathushtra of the Haftan Yasht................. 347


--- Page 16 ---

A NOTE ON THE READING AND PRONUNCIATION OF THE AVESTA

a as in English “but”

FA «ue “ “father”

e “eee “ “mate”

é “ee “ “mate” but somewhat prolonged

i “ee “ as i in “machine” but somewhat prolonged
Oo “ee “ as o in “rope”

35 “ee “ as o in “rope” but somewhat prolonged

u “eae “ as u in “put”

a “eee “ as 00 in “book”

GLOSSARY

Baz (baj): Indicates passages which are recited in a low tone or murmur.

falan: Indicates a place-holder in the text where the appropriate name
should be inserted.

Kiks and karaps: Kiks i.e. those who have eyes but would not see;
karaps i.e. those who have ears but would not hear; its significance is, that
they are neither paying attention to nor acknowledging the doctrines of the
holy Zoroastrian Religion. For them words employed in Avesta are Kaoyam
and Karafnamcha; see Hormazd Yasht, para 10.

Manthra: Manthra Spenta, i.e. beneficent or holy spell. The original
meaning of mdnthra (Sanskrit mantra) is “secret mysteries of the Zoroastrian
Religion”, “mysterious excellences of the Zoroastrian Religion”. A reference
about this we find in Vispered Kardah 13, first paragraph, thus: “Ashem
vispem manthrem yazamaide: Zarathushtrem hadhamanthrem yazamaide”,
i.e. we worship the entire manthra as holy; we worship Zarathushtra who is
one with manthras or the composer of the manthras. In several later books it
is stated that some writings of the Prophet Zarathushtra were so mysterious
that even the great sages could not comprehend their meaning. Moreover,
many famous Persian writers call him, “Paegambare Ramz-gu” (i.e. Prophet
who reveals the secrets). We have no certain evidence at present as to how
many these manthras were originally given by him. See also preface.

Saoka: The original meaning of the word “Saoka” is sharpness, activity
of the mind, brightness of intellect, splendour - brilliance of wisdom (root
such = Sanskrit shuch = to shine): profit, prosperity, happiness (root su =
Persian sud = to profit). Metaphorically it should be understood as the yazata
presiding over these virtues.

Vanant: Vanant is, the central star in the West and the most brilliant. This
star Fomalhaut are generally regarded as the same. It is called the opponent
of the planet Jupiter.


--- Page 17 ---

ASHEM VOHU

>Ashem! Vohi? Vahishtem: asti*
Ushtaé asti,6 Ushta’ ahmai,’
Hyat? ashai'® Vahishtai!! ashem.!2

Translation: Righteousness! is* the best? good? (and it) is* happiness.>
Happiness’ (is) to him’ who? (is) righteous!2 for the sake of the best!! right-
eousness.!°

Explanation:- The significance of the term “Righteousness” is to be un-
derstood as truth, holiness and pristine purity. In our Holy Avesta “Right-
eousness” is highly praised. For this the words “Staomi ashem”: (i.e., I praise
Righteousness) are introduced. Purity of the mind and the body is the most
excellent wealth and happiness of this world. That happiness which is
highest in the matter of truth is attained to that person. The foremost thing
which mankind ought to acquire after having born in this world is Truth, (see
Yazishn Ha 48, stanza 5). Some references written in Avesta itself about the
amount of meritorious deeds acquired by that reciter of Ashem Vohu Prayer
on various occasions sincerely and with proper understanding is found in the
first fargard-chapter of the Hadhokht Nask.° It is mentioned in it that one re-
cital of Ashem Vohu recited with proper comprehension should be truly re-
garded as worth ten thousand recitals on other occasions, when a person
waking up and rising up from sleep recites Ashem Vohi by relinquishing all
wicked thoughts from the mind. Its significance is this that in the early morn-
ing while getting up from sleep one should acquire truth-Righteousness, and
holding fast to it should carry on his daily affairs and business. It is futile to
recite Ashem Vohu on one hand and to utter falsehood and deceive on the
other hand. One must act according to it after reciting it. Moreover in the
very same Nask another fact is mentioned that one recital of Ashem Voht is
worth the entire region Khvaniratha, which is the greatest and most excellent
amongst the Seven Regions of the Earth. When a person at the end of life re-
cites one Ashem Vohu prayer sincerely, he forsakes all wicked thoughts from
his mind.

b These two prayers Ashem Vohu and Yatha Ahu Vairyo are pre-Zarathushtra in age and are the
sacred Verses of the Creator Hormazd Himself. (See Yasna Ha XIX, paras 1-4 and 14; Yasna Ha
XX.3). Yenghe Hatam is the sacred Verse of the Prophet Zarathushtra (See Yasna Ha XXI, para
1). These three well-known prayers are adored with their specific names. Yasna Ha XIX is an
Avestan commentary on the Yatha Ahu Vairyo; Yasna Ha XX gives the commentary on Ashem
Vohu and Yasna Ha XXI gives the commentary of the Yenghe Hatam. These three Has -
chapters are known as Baghan Yasht. These three prayers, specially “Yatha” and “Ashem” are
frequently recited in our holy Avestan Scriptures. Those Zoroastrians who do not know any oth-
er prayer are enjoined to recite “Yatha” and “Ashem” with a view to gaining a share of meritori-
ous deeds.

c See my Yasht Ba Maeni. Yasht XX], pp. 386-393.

1


--- Page 18 ---

2 KHORDEH AVESTA

AHUNAVAR (YATHA AHU VAIRYO)

*Yatha! Ahi? Vairyo?
atha‘ ratush’ ashat® chit’ hacha’,
Vanghéush? dazda!® mananghd"!
shyaothanan4m” anghéush'? Mazdai'4,
Khshathremcha's Ahurai'* 4!”
yim!’ dregubyd” dadat” vastarem”!.

Translation: Just as' a “King? acts according to his will’, so* does the
‘Dasturan Dastur> by means® of righteousness® etc.’ (acts according to his
own will). The gift!® of Vohu-manah*"'! (i.e. Good mind) is for those work-
ing? for Hormazd" of this world;'? he who'* "constitutes himself?® to the pro-
tector?! (or the nourisher)! ‘of the poor’? (accepts) the sovereign rule’ (of the
entire world) (as it were) of Hormazd’®.

Explanation:- Both, the Sovereign King ruling over the countries and the
Pontiff of the Religion are of the same Status and worthy of respect. Those
who are performing good deeds for pleasing Hormazd attain Heaven after
death. He who gives help unto the poor virtuous brothers, regards, as it were,
Hormazd as the Lord of the entire world.

NIRANG-I-GOMEZ MALIDAN

Shekasteh' Shekasteh? Sheytan,> Ahriman‘ gajasteh® kar o kerdar,°
na rasad’ gajasteh® kar o kerdar°®; Si-o-sé!? Ameshaspand" dadar

d As regards Ahunavar it is stated in Yasna Ha XIX that the Creator Hormazd had created the
hymn Ahuna Vairya prior to the creation of the sky and the world. Moreover, in the very same
Ha it is further stated that he who recites the Ahunavar prayer in the proper metre with full com-
prehension and intoned without interruption and without omission attains to such meritorious
deeds equivalent to hundred other holy chants. It is enjoined to chant this most ancient and ex-
cellent prayer of the Avesta in the proper metre with proper intonation and for this verb em-
ployed is Srdvaya (Skt. Sravaya), i.e. to chant. This mantra consists of three lines in poetic form.
First line ends at hachd, the second at Mazda and the third line ends at Vastarem. Moreover this
Ahunavar consists of 21 words corresponding to the 21 Nasks of the original Avesta texts, most
of which has been destroyed. We get the contents of each of these twenty-one Nasks from
Pahlavi and Persian books. The detailed account of these is given in Pahlavi Denkart Book VII
and IX. In addition to all the matters pertaining to Religion these Nasks contain subject-matters
relating to philosophy, medicine, ethics, astronomy, and astrology and all other sciences. For the
beauty and excellence of this poetical prayer Ahunavar, see the translation of Srosh Yasht
Hadhokht Kardah I in this book; for further information see the explanation given under the
translation of Ahunem Vairim tanum pditi in Srosh Baz Prayer.

e Original meaning “The Lord who looks after worldly affairs.”
f Original meaning “The Lord who looks after religious affairs.”
g Righteousness etc. mean righteousness and other virtues associated with it.

h Original meaning “appoints himself” “settles himself”. The last line of Ahunavar resembles to
some extent to the last line of Yasna Ha 53, Stanza 9.

i The Latin and English equivalent for Avesta word Vastar is pastor.


--- Page 19 ---

NIRANG-I-GOMEZ MALIDAN 3

Hormazd” pirozgar® pak;'* ashaone Ashem Vohii 1. (To be recited
thrice).

Note: After having recited this Nirang three times one should recite Srosh
Baz, and whilst reciting five Ahunavar one should apply nirang or bull’s ur-
ine at every Ahunavar to the right and left hand, to the face, to the right and
left leg respectively. One should perform then Padyab-Kusti after completing
the Srosh Baz.

Translation: (May) the Satan? (be) defeated! and destroyed?! (may) the
works and workers® of Ahriman* the accursed (be) destroyed*! may not’
works and workers? of (that) accursed (Ahriman)* reach’ (me)! Thirty-three!°
Holy Immortals (Ameshaspands)'' and the Creator Hormazd!? are victori-
ous!® and holy.'4

Explanation: This Nirang seems to have been composed at a later peri-
od, as its language is Persian. Moreover it is surprising that the number of
Ameshaspands mentioned in this Nirang is thirty-three. Perhaps the motive
of the composer of this Nirang is to regard thirty-three Ameshaspands as
thirty-three angels. According to the ancient books of our religion
Ameshaspands are six in number and Ahura Mazda is counted as the sev-
enth. It is clearly stated in the Pahlavi Nam Setayeshne incorporated in the
Denkart that the Creator Hormazd created six Ameshaspands. In the portion
of “Nipayoish Mashim” occurring in Hormazd Yasht the Creator Hormazd
speaks to the prophet Zarathushtra thus: “I created six Ameshaspands from
Bahman to Amurdad.” In the introductory portions of the Hormazd Yasht
and Ardibehesht Yasht the Creator Hormazd Himself referring to
Ameshaspands says thus: “We Ameshaspands”. In the Haftan Yasht (small)
para 12 there occurs a reference to “Seven Ameshaspands”.

KEM-NA MAZDA

iKem'-na? Mazda° mavaité* payam*® dadat,°
hyat’ ma® dregvao’ didareshata" aénanghé"
anyem” thwahmat’? athrascha'* mananghascha,'*
yayao”’ shyaothnaish” ashem’* thraoshta” Ahura,”
tam?! modi” dastvam” daénayai™ fravaocha”.

Ke” verethrem’’-ja”* thwa” poi sengha*' yoi” henti®
chithra** moi* dam* ahimbish”’ ratim*® chizhdt,”

j This entire hymn Kem-na-Mazda is made up of four parts. They are as under:- (1) The first
portion consisting of lines 1-5 from the beginning to the word fravaochd is taken from Gatha
Ushtvaiti-Yasna Ha 46.7 known as “Kam Nem6i Zam”. (2) The second part commencing from
Ké verethrem-ja to the words vashi kahmdi-chit is borrowed from Yasna Ha 44, Known as Jat-
thwa-peresa stanza 16, (3) The third part beginning from pdta-no tbishyantat up to the words
Astvaitish ashahe is taken from Vendidad fargard VIII para 21. (4) The fourth part viz.
nemascha ya Armaitish izhacha is taken from the Gatha Spenta Mainyu Ha 49.10.


--- Page 20 ---

4 KHORDEH AVESTA

at hoi" voha® seraosho* janta“ manangha,*
Mazda* ahmai*’ yahmai* vashi® kahmaichit.”

Translation: When’ any wicked man’ glares'® at me® for taking revenge''
(or for injuring me’), what’ man’, O Mazda," shall grant® protection*® unto
me and unto my followers*? (who other than’? Thee’ shall grant protection)
to the Fire’* and the Mind’ (i.e. household happiness and the peace of
mind)? Through the action'!” of which two’’, O° Hormazd”"! righteousness'®
increases’. Do Thou declare” that”! knowledge™™ of the religion** to me” (O
Hormazd!).

Who” (shall be) the smiter** of the foe’? by the help of Thy (Avestan)
words*! which” (by reciting at the time of calamity) are** protecting?*° Do
Thou reveal* clearly** unto me* a wise*® leader” for both the worlds*” (O
Hormazd). Let Sraosha® (Yazata) approach“ with Good” Mind* (or through

Vohu Manah) to any one*”? whom* Thou doest love®’.”

Explanation: O Hormazd! When wicked persons torment me and my
followers, who is our protector from such a torment? There is none other
than Thee, who will grant family happiness and peace of mind. The posses-
sion of body and mind in healthy condition increases righteousness. There is
no protector other than Thee, O Hormazd! do Thou evoke, give rise to such a
thought in my mind so that I may get courage and strength in executing any
work.

Pata'-no? tbishyantat? pairit Mazdaoscha’ Armatishcha‘ spentascha,’
nase® daévi drukhsh,’ nase’’ daévo-chithre," nase’? daévo-frakarshte,'
nase daévo0-fradaite,'> apa’® drukhsh’’ nase," apa” drukhsh”’ dvara,”!
apa* drukhsh®  vinase,* apakhedhre*> apa-nasyehe,© ma?’
merenchainish* gaéthao” astvaitish*° ashahe.*! Nemascha” ya*
Armaitish™ izhacha.*5 Ashem Vohi 1.

O Hormazd* and Spenta Armaiti*’! protect! us? from‘ the envious ones.°
(from here) Perish thou,* O devilish Druj,’ perish thou,'® O devil’s spawn;"
perish thou,'? O (evil) sown by the daevas,'* perish thou,'* O follower of
devil’s law;'* perish'® O Druj,'’ disappear’® utterly,”' vanish” and entirely
perish,” in the North,?> O Druj.** (so that) corporeal*® settlements” of right-
eousness*! (may) not?’ (be) fit to be destroyed.”* Homage® (be) unto right
thought** and prosperity!*°
k For Hormazd the expression Ahura Mazda is generally found in the Avesta, but in some
places, especially in the Gathas the words Ahura or Mazda only for Hormazd is noticed.

li.e. by the acts which lead to family happiness and to peace of mind.
m i.e. on whom Thou art friendly or kind.

nie. this thought viz. there is no other protector except Thee.

0 i.e. in order to get reward in this life and in the next.

pi.e. one who points out the path of virtue, the expounder of religious tenets.


--- Page 21 ---

HORMAZD KHODAY 5

HORMAZD KHODAY

‘Hormazd! Khoday? ahereman’ awadashan‘ dir avaz-dashtar;* zad°
shekasteh’ bad,’ ahereman,’ devan’? darujan," jadian” darvandan”
kikan"™ karafan' sastaran,’ gunehgaran'” Ashmoghan® darvandan”
dushmanan” friyan?! zad2 shekasteh® bad.24 Dushpadashahan”™
awadashan® bad;”?’ dushmanan”®  satoh” bad;*° dushmanan™
awadashan* bad.* Hormazd Khoday* az hama gunah* patet
pashemanum,* az?’ harvastin?®? dushmata® duzukhta* duzvarshta,“!
mem” pa geti® manid,“ oim goft*® oim kard,* oim jast,”” oim bin bid
ested,** az 4n gunah®” manashni°’ gavashn?t! kunashni,” tani ravant,™
geti®> mimoant,** okhe*’ "awakhsh pasheman*, pa sé gavashni” pa patet
hom.”

Khshnaothra® ahurahe mazdao;®” tardidite® anghrahe mainyéush.™
Haithya varshtam® hyat® vasna®” ferashotemem;®* staomi® Ashem.”
Ashem Vohii 1. Yatha Ahi Vairyé 2. Ashem Vohi 1.

Translation: Dadar Hormazd' (is) the Lord? (of the entire Universe)
(and) keeps the ‘withholder and keeper at a distance’ of the wicked and
powerless* Ahriman,’ May (that Ahriman) be smitten® and defeated’! May™
(all these) Ahriman,’ daevas,'° drujas,** sorcerers,'* wicked ones,'? ‘Kiks,'*
Karaps,'* tyrants,'’® sinners,'’ “ashmoghs,'* impious ones,'? enemies,”
witches”! be smitten” and defeated™! May** the wicked rulers* cease to ex-
ist! May the enemies*® be confounded! May the enemies be non-existent and
perish.

O Lord Hormazd!* I am in renunciation® of, and desist from, all sins:

wicked thoughts” which in (this) world® I” have thought,“ wicked words*®
which I have spoken,** wicked deeds*’ which I have committed,** (and)
which have occurred through me*’ and which have originated by me*® - (all
these sins mentioned above) relating to thought,” relating to word,*! and re-
lating to deed,* pertaining to (my own) body,* pertaining to (my own)

q This prayer from its beginning to the words “Pa sé gavashni pa patet hom” is in Pazend lan-
guage; the remaining final portion is in Avesta.

r There is a custom amongst some of our Zoroastrians to utter “awakhsh Pasheman” whilst
showing contempt of certain matter or whilst manifesting a thought of such significance as, may
God keep one away from such immoral actions, or whilst repenting and atoning for any un-
worthy and wicked deeds which have been committed. Its meaning is “I return having repented,
keep myself away having regretted”. These word are of Pazend language.

s The meaning of avadashan can be “wicked ruler.”

t Kiks i.e. those who have eyes but would not see; karaps i.e. those who have ears but would not
hear; its significance is, that they are neither paying attention to nor acknowledging the doc-
trines of the holy Zoroastrian Religion. For them words employed in Avesta are Kaoyam and
Karafnamcha; see Hormazd Yasht, para 10.

u Ashmog, i.e. distorters of truth and expounders of falsehood. For it there is an Avesta word
Ashemaogha; see Ardibehesht Yasht para 7.


--- Page 22 ---

6 KHORDEH AVESTA

soul,™ pertaining to this world,* pertaining to the world beyond*® from all
these sins,** O Hormazd!°’ I am in renunciation and keep myself away,*
(and) with the three words*’ (Manashni, Gavashni, Kunashni) I repent.

(May there be) propitiation®' of Ahura Mazda!® (May there be) contempt
of ‘Angra Mainyu™ the Evil Spirit! Whatever is the wish®’ of the doers of
righteous deeds, is superior® (to all other wishes). I praise” righteousness.

Explanation: Hormazd is the Creator of the entire world and is the ruler
over it, there is none equal to Him. May Ahriman and all his daevas, drujas,
sorcerers, tyrants, etc., be shattered, smitten and defeated! O Holy Protector!
For whatever sins have been committed by me. For whatever wicked
thoughts I have harboured for whatever wicked word I have spoken and for
whatever wicked actions I have done or have been executed by me unknow-
ingly - for all these types of sins I sincerely repent and atone for.

JASA ME AVANGHE MAZDA

“Jasa! me? avanghe>? Mazda* Mazdayasno> ahmi*® mazdayasn0d’ Za-
rathushtrish* fravarane® astitascha’ fravaretascha." Astuye”
humatem™ mand,'* astuye'®’ hikhtem’® vach6,'” astuye!® hvarshtem”
shyaothnem.” Astuye?! daénam” vanghuhim® mazdayasnim” fras-
payaokhedhram,* nidhasnaithishem,”* Khavaétvadatham?’ ashaonim,”®
ya” haitinamcha,” bishyeintinamcha*! mazishtacha,” vahishtacha,*
sraéshtacha,™* ya*> ahiirish®* zarathushtrish.” Ahurai Mazdai** vispa*”
vohu® chinahmi.*! Aesha® asti*® datnayao* mazdayasnOish* Astiistish.**
Ashem Vohi 1.

Translation: O Creator Hormazd!* do Thou come! to my’ help.? I am® a
Mazda-worshipper;* I profess myself? (to be) a Mazda-worshipping’ follower
of Zarathushtra,* a devotee’? and an ardent-believer'! (in this Mazda-wor-
shipping Faith). I praise’? the true-conceived!? thought,'* I praise’> the true-
spoken!* word,’’ I praise'® the well-done”’ deed.” I praise”! the excellent” re-
ligion” of Mazda-worship,™ (which is) quarrel-removing,*> weapon-lower-
ing,*° self-dedicating”’ (and) holy,** which”? of those that are*’ and of those
shall be?! (hereafter) (is) the greatest,** and the best*? and the most excel-
lent,** which* is the religion of Ahura** revealed-by-Zarathushtra.*’

I acknowledge*’ all? good” (things) (which are) from Hormazd.** Such”

v Here Ahriman stands in opposition to Hormazd. This idea should be understood of later period
of Avesta. In the ancient period of the Avesta, i.e. during the period when the Gathas were com-
posed, Hormazd has been regarded as the Creator of the entire world and its destroyer. He has
no rival, but under His sovereignty Spend mino and Angra mino carry out some work pertaining
to this world.

w The entire passage except the words Jasa me avanghe Mazda is taken from Yasna Ha XII.
This Yasna Ha XII is the Zoroastrian Creed. See the Zoroastrian creed (in Avesta) in this book.
The words Jasa me avanghe Mazda occur in Hormazd Yasht, para 27.


--- Page 23 ---

JASA ME AVANGHE MAZDA 7

is* the praise* of the religion“* of Mazda-worship.*°

Explanation: Some essential features of the Mazda-worshipping Reli-
gion are noticed from the above passage. Besides this, many other excellent
features of this pure religion we find in Vendidad, Yazishna and Vispered as
well. In the Vendidad fargard V paras 22-24 it is stated that just as the sea
Vouru-Kasha is greatest of all other seas and just as the great tree overshad-
ows other small plants and just as the sky encompasses the entire earth
around, in the same way Zoroastrian Religion in its greatness, goodness and
excellence, covers all other religions. See Yasna Ha 44, stanza 10.

BAZ (PRAYER) FOR SAYING GRACE

‘Ba name yazade,' bakhshayandeh? bakhshayeshgare? meherban‘
Hormazd> Khoday® itha’ at® Yazamaide? Ahurem’’ Mazdam", yell
gamcha” ashemcha™ dat apascha' dat!* urvaraoscha!” vanguhish,'®
raochaoscha” dat” bimimcha,”! vispacha” vohi?? Ashem Vohii 3.

(After reciting the above prayer the person eats the meals, thanking the
Almighty God for all good things and after washing hand and mouth, he
prays as follows):-

Ashem Vohi 4. Yatha Ahi Vairyd 2, Ashem Vohi 1. Ahmiai
Raéshcha, Hazangrem, Jasa me Avanghe Mazda, Kerfeh mozd.

Translation: In the Name of God' and with His help (I begin to recite
this prayer) (who is) the Lord’ Hormazd* the bestower of all good things,’
the forgiver of sins? and loving.* Thus here® we revere? Ahura Mazda!? who!’
created the animals” and "grain,'* who created'® water'® and good'® vegeta-
tion!’ who created” lights’? (of the sky) and the earth’ and all (other) good
things (over and above these).

BAZ TO BE RECITED BEFORE PASSING URINE AND
ANSWERING THE CALL OF NATURE

(The person standing three paces from the place of the toilet recites the
sentence as below:)

”Guneh! Shekasteh? Sad hazar-bar.’ Yatha Ahi Vairyo 1.

x The portion of this Baz for saying Grace from the beginning up to Ahura Mazda Khodae is in
Pazend language and the portion from “‘itha 4t yazamaide” up to ““Vispacha vohu” is taken from
yasna Ha 37. para 1.

y The original meaning of ashem is equivalent to Persian drd i.e. flour, powder. In such a mean-
ing this word occurs in Vendidad Fargard V as regards the treatment of a woman who has been
delivered of a still-born child.

z In the Persian Rivayets of Darab Hormazdyar these Persian words “gunesh shekasteh sad
hazar bar” is not written for recital; but in it is mentioned to recite only one Yatha ahii Vairy6 in-
stead, whilst passing urine or answering the call of nature.


--- Page 24 ---

8 KHORDEH AVESTA

Translation: May sins' be smitten? a hundred thousand times*!

(After having passed urine or answered the call of nature, holding the
strings or tape of pyjamas, he purifies himself with dry earth, retraces three

steps, and recites the following “baz”.)

Ashem Vohi 3, *Humatanam! hikhtanam? hvarshtanam,’ yadacha‘
anyadacha® verezymnanamcha® vaéverezanaaamcha,’ mahi  aibt-
jaretaro’ naénaéstaro,' yathana," vohunam” mahi." (to be recited twice)

Just as'’ we are!’ (the praisers and meditators) of good men,” (in the
same way) we are® the praisers’? and meditators'® of the doers® of good
thoughts,! good words? and good deeds? for this world* and for the world
beyond’, and of those who have performed (good deeds) in the past.

*’Hukhshathrotemai! bat? khshathrem,? ahmat‘ hyat*® aibt-
dademahicha,° chishmahicha,’ hvanmahicha® hyat? mazdai!® ahurai,"
ashaicha” Vahishtai's (to be recited three times). Yatha Ahi Vairy6 4.

(May there) verily” (be) sovereignty’ for the best ruler’ (Hormazd)! We
devote our mind to® (or engage ourselves in the service of)® Hormazd'*"’
who’ (Himself) is the Best'* “Righteousness”. We acknowledge’ (Him) (and)
regard (Him) as our own.®

“4Ahunem Vairim! yazamaide,? ashem vahishtem? Sraéshtem‘
ameshem spentem® yazamaide,’ yenghe’ hatam® dat’ yesne’’ paiti'
vangho,’” Mazdao Ahuro™ vaétha’ ashat'’ hacha'® yaonghamcha”’
tanscha" taoscha” yazamaide.”” Ashem Vohi 1.

We praise’ Ahunavar,' We praise Ardibehesht* (who is) the most surpass-
ing Ameshaspand,* among living beings® who’ (is) better’ in acts of wor-
ship,’ of such Ahura Mazda? (Himself) is aware'* on account of" their holi-
ness! - all such,'” both men!® and women,” do we revere.””

FIVE GAHS TO BE RECITED SEPARATELY
“(During Havan Gah)

Havanée ashaone ashahe' rathwe, yasnaicha vahmaicha
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha. Savanghée Visyaicha ashaone ashahe

aa The entire portion of Humatanam occurs in Yasna Ha 35 para 2.
ab The entire portion of Hukhshathrdtemai also occurs in Yasna Ha 35 para 5.

ac Praiseworthy names of the Creator Hormazd are numerous, of which one name is “Right-
eousness”. Similar writing is noticed in Hormazd Yasht. In this Yasht the Creator Hormazd is re-
cognised by us by various names, which are approximately seventy. Moreover, at present, we
have 101 names of the Creator Hormazd in Pazend language and these names are being re-
membered by the yaozdathregar priest whilst performing the Yasna ceremony.

ad This entire para occurs at the end of Yasna Ha 18 and Yasna Ha 27.

ae For the meaning see the beginning portion of five Gah.


--- Page 25 ---

FIVE GAHS TO BE RECITED SEPARATELY 9

rathwe, yasnaicha vahmiaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha.
“(During Rapithwan Gah)

Rapithwinai ashaone ashahe rathwe, yasnaicha, vahmaicha
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha. Fradat-fshave zantumaicha ashaone
ashahe rathwe, yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha.

(During Uzirin Gah)

Uzyerinai ashaone ashahe’ rathwe, yasnaicha vahmaicha
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha. Fradat-virai dakhyumaicha ashaone
ashahe rathwe, yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha.

(During Aiwisruthrem Gah)

Aiwisrithremai aibigayai ashaone ashahe rathwe, yasnaicha vahmai-
cha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha. Fradat-vispam hujyditee zara-
thushtrotemaicha ashaone ashahe rathwe, yasnaicha vahmaicha
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha.

(During Ushahen Gah)

Ushahinai ashaone ashahe rathwe, yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaoth-
raicha frasastayaécha. Berejyai nmanyaicha ashaone ashahe rathwe,
yasnaicha vahmiaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha.

SROSH BAZ
*8k hshnaothra! Ahurahe Mazdao? Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name! yazdan? Hormazd? Khodae* awazini,> gorje’ khoreh’
awazayad,® Sarosh’ asho,!° tagi, tan-farman,” shekaftzin,’ zin-
awazar,'* salare damane Ahura Mazda" be-rasad.'® Az hama gunah"””
patet pashemanum;!* az!  harvastin?? dushmata*! duzhukhta”
duzhuvarshta,™ mem” pa geti* manid” oem goft,?” oem kard,”*®> oem
jast? oem bin bid ested,” az 4n gunah*' manashni*® gavashni*®
kunashni,* tani® ravani** geti?’ minoani,*> okhe*? avakhsh®? pasheman”
pa sé gavashni"! pa patet hom.” Yatha Ahi Vairyod 5, Ashem Vohi 3.

af Note that from Roz Hormazd Month Awan up to Gatha Vahishtoisht Rapithwan Gah is not re-
cited, but in its stead there is Second Havan. During this period in the Khshuman of all prayers,
Rapithwan Gah is not recited, but it is enjoined to recite Havan Gah. For the remaining seven
months i.e. from Roz Hormazd Mah Fravardin up to Roz Aneran Mah Meher, five Gahs are re-
cited. The reason is that during these five months (according to original correct calculation) of
winter, hours during the day-time are shorter than those of the summer months. Moreover, dur-
ing winter there is less heat during noon-time. The Gah pertaining to summer-season (Rapith-
wan) therefore is discarded. About these winter days in the Persian Rivayets it is figuratively
written that heat during those days is buried underneath the earth.

ag The portion from “pa name yazdan” up to “pa patet hom” is in Pazend language. Similarly it
is to be understood in every Niyayesh and Yasht.


--- Page 26 ---

10 KHORDEH AVESTA

Translation: (May there be) propitiation' of (the Creator) Ahura Mazda!
(I begin to recite this) with (the help of) the name! of (the Creator)
Hormazd,* the Lord’ and the Lord* (of the whole world) and munificent.°
May the splendour® and glory’ (of the Creator Hormazd) increase!* May
Srosh® (yazad) the holy,’° strong,’ word-incarnate”’ (i.e. whose body even is
the Holy Spell), possessed of efficacious weapons" (in order to smite the
daevas and wicked men), possessed of victorious weapon" (and) the chief of
the creatures of Hormazd!> come'® (to my help)! I renunciate, and desist'®
from all sins;'7?? all wicked thoughts?! which in this world*** I have
thought,*® wicked words”! which I have spoken,?’ wicked deeds* which I
have committed** (and) which have been caused through me” (and ) which
have been originated by me*® (all these sins mentioned above) relating to
thought,” relating to word® and relating to deed,** pertaining to (my own)
body,** pertaining to (my own) soul,** pertaining to this world,*’ pertaining to
the world beyond,** all these sins,*’ O Hormazd! I discard and keep myself
away”? (and) with the three words“! (i.e. good thought, good word and good
deed) I repent.

““Fravarane® Mazdayasnd“ Zarathushtrish* vidaévo* Ahura-
tkaesh6o*” (gah according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha
Sraoshahe* ashyehe,” takhmahe, tanu manthrahe,*! darshi-draosh,~
ahiiryehe,* kshnaothra™ yasnaicha® vahmaicha® khshnaothraicha”
frasastayaecha,* Yatha Ahi Vairyo* zaota® fra-me*' mrite,” atha
ratush ashat chit hacha® fra ashava™ vidhvao® mraoti.©

I profess* myself to be a worshipper of Hormazd,* follower in accord-
ance with the religion revealed by (the prophet) Zarathushtra,** abstainer
from (the path of) “(daevas** and act according to the Law of Ahura Mazda*’
(Gah according to the period of the day) for the worship, veneration,*° propi-
tiation®” and glorification,’ with propitiatory formula’ (Khshnuman) of

ah “Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish Vidaévo Ahura-tkaesh6” is the shortest Zoroastrian
Creed. This is a sort of a Creed as regards the kind of religion the reciter observes.

ai The word “dev” which is called “daeva” in the Avesta has four different meanings according
to the opinion of Sheth Kharshedji Rustomji Cama, or in other words we learn of four types of
dev from the Avesta: (1) daevas having the appearance of man; (2) daevas producing diseases;
(3) immoral daevas (4) daevas decreasing prosperity: (1). These persons who produce wicked-
ness by increasing diseases or by decreasing prosperity or by ruining morality, are called the
daevas having the appearance of men; e.g. Zohak, wicked people of Gilan and Mazandaran, etc.
(2). Those who emit diseases and untimely death by whatever means or objects are also called
“daevas,” e.g. a statement is made in Vendidad frakart VII about some daevas residing in the
tombs. Here the meaning of daeva is to be understood as impure. They produce diseases while
coming out of the tombs. (3). Whatever incites us to follow the path of wickedness is also
termed “daeva”, e.g., slander, deceit, heresy, evil eye, impurity, etc. (4). Whatever causes dis-
turbance in the spread of prosperity is also known by the term daeva, e.g. the demon Apaosha
prevents rain i.e. the causes responsible for the prevention of rain are known by the name
“apaosha’’. Excessive cold is regarded as the queen of demons. See Sheth K.R. Cama “‘Zarthosht
Namu” VI... “Who is daeva”.


--- Page 27 ---

SROSH BAZ u

Srosh* the holy,” powerful,°° word-incarnate,*! of infuriate weapon” (for
y, Pp p

smiting the daevas) and according to the law of Ahura let the Zaotar®
(officiating priest®) recite” to me! the (the excellences of the sacred verses
of) Yatha Ahi Vairyo for propitiation™ (of the Creator Hormazd) (in so and
so Gah) for the worship* of Srosh yazad* the holy,” the powerful,” word-
incarnate*' (for smiting the daevas), mighty-speared* (and) acting according
to the Law of Ahura Mazda,* for (his) praise,*° for (his) propitiation™ (and)
for (his) glorification.*’ Let (Raspi the assistant priest who is) righteous“ and
learned® “recite® (the excellences of such verses) “atha ratush ashat-chit
hacha.”®

Explanation: The words from “Yatha Ahi Vairyo Zaota” up to “vidhvao
mraotu” which are recited in every Niyayesh, Gah and Yasht after “fravarane
mazdayasno” are borrowed from the yasna. Raspi, i.e. the assistant priest sit-
ting opposite the Zaotar, addresses him thus: “Yatha Aht Vairyo zaota fra me
mrute” implying that Zaotar may explain the excellences of “Yatha Ahi
Vairyo” and the Religion of Zarathushtra to him. The Zaotar then replies.
The Raspi after having fully comprehending the excellencies and grasping
the essence of the Religion of Zarathushtra would now put them into practice
and expound them to others.

Sraoshem,® Ashim,” huraodhem,® verethrajanem” fradat-gaéthem”
ashavanem” ashahe” ratim™ yazamaide”? Ahunem” vairim’ tanim”
paiti,” Ahunem vairim tanim paiti, Ahunem vairim tanim paiti. Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 1.

We praise Sraosha® the Holy,®’ the beautiful, the victorious,” bringing-
prosperity-to the-world,” the Righteous one,” the Lord” of Righteousness.”
Ahunavar” protects” the body.”

Explanation: The significance of Ahunavar. To understand the verse of
Yatha Aht Vairyo. By remembering the Creator Hormazd, by keeping full
faith in the verse of Ahunavar, by chanting and reciting it properly, we be-
come powerful and to some extent we get strength to avoid the difficulty or
impending calamity. Regarding the efficacious excellence of Ahunavar we
get some explanation from the beginning portion of Vendidad XIX fargard
and from the first Kardah of Srosh Yasht Hadhokt. In the Vendidad fargard
XIX it is stated that when Ahriman and the entire army of daevas and drujas
came to kill the holy Zarathushtra, amongst the remedies applied by the holy
prophet in order to destroy them, the foremost was that he recited and
chanted aloud the most powerful verse of Ahunavar. Besides, some
Zoroastrians while commencing any work or during any calamity say, “Atha
thy help”, “atha” is originally “Yatha” and “Yatha” is the first word of
“Yatha Ahti vairyo”.

aj Fra....mrute also means speak loudly, speak in a loud tone.


--- Page 28 ---

12 KHORDEH AVESTA

*“Kém na Mazda (to be recited in full) Yatha Aha Vairyd 2;
yasnemacha* vahmemcha® aojascha® zavarecha®’ afrinami,®® sraosh-
ahe,® ashyehe,” takhmahe,”! tanu-manthrahe,” darshi-draosh,”* ahiir-
yehe.” Ashem Vohii 1.

I praise®’ and worship, according lo the law of Ahura Mazda the glory,
dexterity® and strength®’ of Srosh yazata,® the holy,” strong,”! the word-in-
carnate,”” possessed of powerful weapon” (in order to smite the daevas).

AHMAI RAESHCHA

™Ahmai' raéshcha? khvarenascha,? ahmai‘ tanvd*> dravatatem,°
ahmai’ tanv6® vazdvare,’ ahmai!® tanv6" verethrem,” ahmai!> ishtim'*
pourush-khvathram,® ahmai'® asnamchit! frazantim,'!® ahmai’’
daregham”’ dareghd-jitim,?! ahmai” vahistem-ahim” ashaonam™
raochanghem” vispd-khvathrem.”’ Atha?’ jamyat,” yatha® afrinami.*°
Ashem Vohi 1.

Translation: *“(Do thou) (O Holy Srosh yazad) (grant) lustre? and glory*
unto him! (i.e. unto the person) who worships thee (the Holy Srosh yazad)
with the best *“‘zaothras”, with excellent “zaothras” and with the “zaothras”
strained - prepared carefully by good people: (do thou grant) unto him* the
soundness’ of the body, happiness, victoriousness,'* wealth'* with fullness of
welfare,'* and progeny’® of innate wisdom.'’ (Do thou grant) unto him’? a
long”? life?’ (and) heaven” of the righteous™ bright? (and) comfortable.”°
May it be so as I pray (i.e. may my blessings be fulfilled! )

HAZANGHREM

“Hazanghrem! baéshazanam,” baevare? baéshazanam;*
Hazanghrem*® baéshazanam,° baévare’ baéshazanam,® Hazanghrem?
baéshazanam,” baévare! baéshazanam.'”

Ashem Vohii 1.

Translation: (May there be) a thousand of health, ten thousands of
health! May there be health a thousand times.

ak For the Avesta text and translation of Kém Na Mazda.

al The portion from the beginning up to “visp6 khvathrem” of these benedictions is taken from
yasna Ha 68:11 and the words, “atha jamyat yatha afrinam?” are taken from the last part of para
8 of “Afrin i Paighambar Zartosht”.

am Its explanation is given after the translation of the passage “ahuranish ahurahe” at the end of
Khorshed Niyayish.

an “Zor” i.e. a thing that is offered in sacred service or religious ceremony, an offering, as milk,
water, food, fruits, etc.

ao The portion of Hazanghrem is found in yasna Ha 68.15.


--- Page 29 ---

JASA ME AVANGHE MAZDA 13

JASA ME AVANGHE MAZDA

*PJasa' me? avanghe® mazda,‘ jasaS me® avanghe’ mazda,° jasa’ me’
avanghe" mazda,’ Amahe® hutashtahe’ huraodhahe’ verethragh-
nahe,'© ahuradhatahe,” vanaintyaoscha  uparatato'!® ramand”
khvastrahe,” vayaosh”’ upar6-kairyehe” taradhatd* anyaish™* daman,”*
aétat” te?” vayo” yat” te** asti®! spent6-mainyaom” thwashahe® khvad-
hatahe,** zrvanahe* akaranahe,** zrvanahe*’ dareghd-khvadhatahe.
Ashem Vohi 1.

Translation: O Hormazd! Come’ unto my’ help.* Of the well-shapen"*
(and) beautiful!’ Ama!® (yazata of strength), of Behram yazad’* created by
Ahura,'’ of Vanainti Uparatat'® (i.e. the yazata presiding over victorious
ascendency), of Mino Ram,” giver of taste of food,”® of “*Vay yazad?! work-
ing-on-high,” (who is) created superior to other creations - (may the help of
all of them reach me through you, O Hormazd. O Vay yazad!** (get me the
help) of thy*° (wind) which” is*' pertaining to the Beneficent Spirit*?. Of the
sky** taking course according to the Law of nature,** of the Endless** Time,*°
of the Time*’ Ordained for a long period** (may the help of these all reach
me, O! Hormazd).

KERFEH MOZD

“Kerfeh mozd' gunah guzareshnera? kunam,’ ashahi‘ ravan‘
dusharamra* ham kerfeh® hama vehane’ haft-keshvar zamin,* zamin-
pahana,’ rud-drana,"’ khorshid-bala,"' bundehad” be-rasad; asho bed*
der-zi,'° Atha!’ Jamyat'® yatha” afrinami.”° Ashem Vohi 1.

For the expiation of sins’ I obtain’ the reward of meritorious deeds', and
for the sake of the love of* the soul’, may complete’” righteousness* reach"
all the doers of good deeds*® and all the faithful’ (residing) on the seven re-
gions of the earth’, - as wide as the earth’, as long as the river'® and as high
as the Sun!’ “! May there be’ long life’® of the righteous (man).“ May it be!®

ap “Jasa me Avanghe Mazda” consists of the Avestan texts taken from three different places
mentioned-below:- The sentence “Jasa me Avanghe Mazda” is taken from Yasht Hormazd, para
27. The portion from “Amahe hutashtahe” up to “uparatat6” is taken from the Behram Yazad
khshnuman, of the small Siroza. The portion from “Ramano khvastrahe” up to the end is taken
from the Khshnuman of Mino Ram of the Small Siroza.

aq Yazata presiding over pure and health-giving air. In Pahlavi he is called ““Vay i Veh’. Its op-
posite is “Vay i Saritar” or “Vay i Vattar’”’ (poisonous-air). See Vendidad fargard V, paras 8-9.

=

ar This prayer from the beginning up to “asho bed der-z7” is in Pazend language. The words,
“atha jamyat yatha afrinami” are in Avestan language and as mentioned earlier are taken from
“Afrin i Paighambar Zartosht”. para 8.

as Compare Avesta Zem-frathangha, danu-drajangha hvare-barezangha (see yasna Ha 60, para
4).

at i.e. may the truthful person enjoy his life, with happiness for a long time!


--- Page 30 ---

14 KHORDEH AVESTA

so’’ as’’ I pray” (i.e. may my greetings be fulfilled!).

HOSHBAM

“(This prayer is recited only at day-break or dawn.)

Atha! iman? vacho? drenjaydish;‘ yois anghen®
varethraghnydtemacha’ baéshazydtemacha;® pancha’? ahuna vairya’
frasravaydish."' Yatha Ahi Vairyé 5: Ahunem-vairim” tanim’? *‘paiti."4
ahunem-vairim' tanim” paiti;'’ ahunem-vairim™ tanim” paiti.”” Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 1; Kém na Mazda (to be recited fully); Ashem vohu 1;

Yatha Ahi Vairyo 21, Ashem Vohi 12.

Nemase-te”? hushbami;” nemase-te> hushbami* nemase-te*
hushbami.” *“aétat dim?’ vispanam” mazishtem* dazdyai,*' ahimcha®
ratimcha® yim* ahurem mazdam,* snathai** anghrahe mainyéush*’
dravato,* snathai® aéshmahe” khravidraosh,”! snathai” mazainyanam®
daévanam,“ snathai* vispanam* daévanam,”” varenyanamcha*®
dravatam”® (to be recited in baz or low tone) shekasteh* ghanamenyo,”!
bar ahreman™ leanat® sad hazar bar.“ (to be recited in a loud tone)
Fradathai®’ Ahurahe Mazdao*  raévatd*’ khvarenanghuhato,*
fradathai® Ameshanam Spentanam,” fradathai®' tishtryehe” staro®
raévato™ khvarenanghuhaté,® fradathai® narsh®’ ashaon6,® fradathai®
vispaniam” Spentahe Mainyéush”! * damanam” ashaonam.” Yatha Ahi
Vairy6 2.

Translation: Thou shouldst* thus! recite* these? (under-mentioned Avesta
verses’) which*® are® most victorious’ - efficacious and healing.* Thou
shouldst chant!! five? Ahunavars'°; Ahunavar’’ protects'* the body.’*

Homage (be) unto thee,”! O Dawn!” This”’ (is) in order to raise weapon*®
(against) the wicked** Angra Mainyu,” (against the daeva) Aeshma,” of ter-
rible weapon,*! (against) the Mazanian* daevas,“ and in order to raise
weapon* (against) all*® the daevas,*”’ (against) the *’Varenian** wicked ones,”
and to dedicate*' to Him,”* the greatest*® of all”? (our) Ahu (Lord)” and Ratu
(Master)*? who* (is) Ahura Mazda.**

(May) Gana Mino*! (be) defeated**! (May there be) imprecations** upon
Ahriman® a hundred thousand time™. (All these are) for the growth® (or

au i.e. prayer at Dawn.
=9

av The portion from “Atha iman vacho” up to “tanum paiti”, is taken from Vendidad 11, para 3.

aw The portion from “aetat dim vispanim” up to “damanam ashaonam” is here taken from
Yazishn Ha 27.

ax For explanation, see page 17.

ay If the word “varenya” be compared with the Pahlavi word “varunik” (i.e. revengeful), the
meaning of the words “varenyanamcha dravatam” can be “of the revengeful wicked men”.


--- Page 31 ---

HOSHBAM 15

glory) of Ahura Mazda*, possessed of treasures*’ and glorious*’; for the in-
crease® of the Ameshaspands®; for the increase®! of star® Tishtrya®, pos-
sessed of treasures“ and glorious®; for the increase of the holy® man‘”’

(and) for the increase of? all” the holy” creatures” of Spena Mino”.

Explanation: The passage from “aetat dim” up to “damanam, ashaonam”
is here taken from Yasna Ha 27. The reliable explanation of what “all these
to dedicate” can be given from Yasna Ha | up to the end of Yasna Ha 26; its
main aim (of whatever prayers and votive offerings being dedicated) is to
please the Creator Ahura Mazda, Ameshaspands - the Holy Immortals and
other yazatas - and to sing their glory and to defeat Ahriman and his daevas
and drujas.

Vanghucha™” vanghuyaoscha™ Aafrinami,” vispayao” ashaono”®
stdish” haithyaicha® bavanithyaicha*' bishyanithydicha,”’ Ashim®
rasentim™ dareghd-varethmanem,® mishachim® hvo*’ aiwishachim®
mishachim® Afrasaonghaitim.” Barentim®! vispa0” baéshazao,”
apamcha™ gavamcha* urvaranamcha.” Taurvayeintim”’ vispao”
tbaéshao,” daévanam'” mashyanamcha.' Areshyantam’? ahmiaicha*®
nmanai* ahmaicha* nmanahe® nmano-patée’.

I praise” good men™ and women” who are,* who were*! ” and will be,”
of the entire” creation” of Holy Hormazd.” I praise Ashis (i.e. yazata named
Ashivanguhi having such traits)** who come for help* (and is) the protector
for a long time,* the friend*® (of good man) and herself the willing follower®
(well-)instructing” companion,” and keeper”! of all healing virtues,” for
waters,” cattles® and plants” (i.e. for them) and the destroyer’’ of all”® evils”
of the daevas,'”’ wicked men! (who are) the tormentors’ of this’ house* and
lord’ of this’ house.®

Vanghiishcha® adhao? vanghuhishcha’’ ashayo,"' hupaurvao”
vahehish,'* aparao™ rasentish,’ dareghd vare thmand,’® yatha’’ no®
mazishtaoscha” vahistaoscha”’ sraéshtaoscha”! ashayd” erenvante”
ameshanam spentanam™ yasnaicha* vahmaicha** khshnaothraicha”’
frasastayaécha.** Fradathai” ahe* nmanahe,*' fradathai” vispayao*
ashaon6*™ stdish,** hamistée* vispayao”’ dravatd* stdish.* Stavas” asha"!
yé” hudao® yoi* “henti.*

(J praise) good charitable works,° and righteous deeds! (which are) of a
very exalted dignity’? (and) superior’ (and which) subsequently" (i.e. in
their results) (are) attaining to’* (our help) (and) affording shelter for a long
time,'® so that'’ the greatest,'? best”? and excellent?’ righteousness” may
reach” us.”

az Darmesteter. - “are coming into being” (Mills)

ba The portion from “vanghucha vanghuyaoscha” up to “vispayao dravato stoish” is here taken
from the first four paragraphs of Yasna Ha 52. These Gathic words “stavas asha yé hudao yoi
henti” are taken from Yasna Ha 45, known as “At Fravakhshya”, para 6.


--- Page 32 ---

16 KHORDEH AVESTA

Explanation: (as to how we may gain righteousness is mentioned
below).

For the worship?> of the Ameshaspands™ and for (their) adoration,”® for
(their) propitiation”’ and for (their) glorification,** (and) prosperity of this*®
house,*! for the prosperity’ of the entire creation of righteous*
(Hormazd), and for the entire antagonism* of the entire*’ creation®’ of the
wicked* (that righteousness may attain to us). On account of truthfulness*’ I
sing” the glory of Him who (Himself) (is) of good wisdom* (and of those)
who* are His Ameshaspands - Holy Immortals.

’°Vasascha! ti? Ahura Mazda? ushtacha,‘ khshaésha’ havanaim‘
damanam.’ Vaso* apd,’ vaso!’ urvarao," vaso” vispa’’ vohii'* asha-
chithra;'*> khshayamnem!® ashavanem!’ dayata.'® Akhshayamnem”
dravantem.”” Vasokhshathro”’ khyat” ashava;* avasd-khshathro~“
khyat*®> dravao* gato?’ hamishtd, nizberetd” hacha* spentahe

mainyéush*! damaby6,” varatd* avaso-khshathro.*4

At Thy will’ and with happiness* Thou, O Ahura Mazda!? rulest over?
Thine-own’ creations;’ (Thou rulest) at (Thy) will® over waters,’ over trees'!
and over all’? good things,'* the seeds of righteousness.'* Thou appoint'*® the
holy (man)’’ a ruler (but) not the infidel (i.e. the sinful man). May the right-
eous”* (man) be” ruling-at-will?' (but) may the infidel,*® fallen’’ into calam-
ity,”’ cast” out* of the creations” of the Holy Spirit,*’ having failed* (in his
schemes) be” not-ruling-at-will.**

Hakhshaya** = azem-chit** = yo**-——s Zarathushtro* _—sfrateman“°
nmananamcha," visamcha,” zantunamcha* dakhyunamcha,“ anghao*
daénayao*” anumatayaécha” anukhtayaécha,* anvarshtayaécha,” ya’
ahiirish*' Zarathushtrish.”

“Yatha® nd daongham® shato® mando,’ vahishtd* urvand”?
khvathravaitish® tanvo* hentd? vahishto® anghush;“ akdaoschoit®
ahuire Mazda jasentam.” Asha® vahishta,® asha”  sraéshta”!
daresama” thwa,” pairi” thwa’> jamyama,” hamem” thwa,” hakhma.”
Ashem Vohii 1; Asha vahishta, asha sraéshta, daresima thwa, pairi thwa
jamyama, hamem thwa hakhma. Ashem Vohi 1; Asha vahishta, asha
sraéshta, daresama thwa, pairi thwa jamyama, hamem thwa hakhma.
Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmai raéscha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

bb i.e. for Ahura Mazda being the source of Truthfulness, or in other words: with truthfulness,
i.e. with my sincere heart and pure conscience I sing the glory of Ahura Mazda.

be The portion from “Vasascha ti Ahura Mazda” up to “Ahurish Zarathushtrish” is taken from
Yasna Ha 8, paras 5-6-7.

bd The portion from here up to “hamem thwa hakhma” is from Yasna Ha 60, paras 11-12.


--- Page 33 ---

HOSHBAM 17

°-]36 who** am Zarathushtra® will guide® the leaders*’ of the house,* of

the clans,” towns* and lands,“ to think,*’ to speak* and to act in conformity
with” this** Religion*’ which” is of Ahura,*' revealed-by-Zartosht,” so that®
our™ minds*’ (be) full of joy® (and) (our) souls* (attain) the best,** (our)
bodies be® full of heavenly glory® (may be fit) for the best® world™ (i.e.
Heaven) O Ahura Mazda® may (all these good wishes) reach” (us) “openly®

Through the best® righteousness,” excellent” righteousness,” (O Ahura
Mazda) may we catch sight of” Thee”? and may we come” near” Thee”
(and) attain to’ Thy” eternal” friendship!” (i.e. may we become worthy of
Thy friendship!)

KHORSHED NYAYESH

Note: This Nyayesh is enjoined in the Persian Rivayet to be recited dur-
ing three Gahs daily during the day, i.e. Havan, Rapithwan, and Uzirin.

Khshnaothra! Ahurahe Mazdao.? Ashem Vohi 1; Pa name? yazdan,*
“’satayem*® zabaem® dadar Ahura Mazda’ raydmand,® khorehmand?
harvesp-agah,” kerdegar" khodavandan khodavand” padashah" bar"
hame padashahan,"* negehdar,’’ khaleke’® makhluk,” ar-razzak ruzi-
dehandeh,” kader"' o kavi? oo kadim;*  bakhshayandeh”
bakhshayeshgar,> meherban,” tavana?’ o dana** o dadar” o pak
parvardegar.” Adel padashah? bizaval® bashad.*? Hormazd** Khodae**
awazini* gorje”’ khoreh*® awazayad.” Khorshed* amarg*! rayomand”
aurvad-asp* be-rasad.*

(May there be) the rejoicing,’ of Ahura Mazda.’ (I commence this recital)
in the name? of the Creator.* I praise> and invoke’ Hormazd’ (who) is the
Keeper of treasures,* Glorious,'° Omniscient,’ the Perfector of all deeds, '' the
Lord of Lords,’? King over’ all'® Kings,'® the Protector,'’ the Creator'® of
(all), things created,'® the Giver of the daily bread,” the Natural?! and the
Powerful,” without beginning or end,” the Bestower of good things,™ the
Forgiver of sins,*° the Loving,”° Omnipotent,’’ Wise’ and the Nourisher (of
all creations).*° May the Majesty*” (and) Glory** of Hormazd* (who is) the

be In Azemchit (i.e. I and others etc.) it appears that the Holy Prophet Zarathushtra intends to
even consider highly with himself his learned and well-versed disciples.

am”

bf The entire translation from “akaoschdit” up to “Jasentam” does not seem to be satisfactory,
although every word is easy. With delightful mind and happiness of the Soul. O! Ahura Mazda,
we ourselves having come nearer to Thee, shall attain the happiness of Heaven’. (Darmesteter).

bg The portion beginning from “‘satayem zbayem” up to “Adel padashahi bizaval bashad” ap-
pears to be a later addition because in the beginning of every Nyayesh and Yasht there occurs in
this way “Pa name yazdan Hormazd Khodae awzuni gorje khoreh awazayad”, but in this place
after adding some epithets of the Creator Hormazd there occurs “Hormazd Khodae Awazini”,
etc. Another reason is that in the portion beginning with “Satayem zbayem” up to “Adel pa-
dashahi bizaval bashad” some Arabic words occur, such as, khaleke makhluk, ar-razzak kader,
etc., which do not occur in the Pazend introduction of other Avestan texts.


--- Page 34 ---

18 KHORDEH AVESTA

Lord*®* and the Producer* (Creator of the whole world) be on the increase! *”

May the immortal,*! brilliant’ and the swift footed horse Sun“ (ie.
Khorshed yazata) come (to my help)!

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tant
ravani geti mmoani, okhe awakhsh pasheman, pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom.”

(1) (To recite with a bow) Nemase-te! Ahura Mazda’, nemase-te Ahura
Mazda, nemase-te Ahura Mazda, thrish-chit? pard* anyadish’ daman’®.
Nemo’ ve® Amesha Spenta’ vispe’’ hvare-hazaoshao". Aétat? jahat?
Ahurem Mazdam"™ aétat'’ Ameshe Spente'’, aétat'? ashaonam™®
Fravashish”, aétat?” vayam?' daregh6-khadhatem.” (2) Khshnaothra
Ahurahe Mazdao, tardidite anghrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat
vasna ferashOtemem staomi Ashem ™ Ashem Vohii 1.

*i(May there be) homage unto Thee!! Thrice’, O Ahura Mazda,” prior to*
(Thy) other® creatures!® (May there be) homage’ unto you,* O Holy Immor-
tals!? (You who are) all!° of one accord!! with Khorshed yazata'! (i.e. co-
workers with one will and one accord). May this’* (homage of mine) reach"?
(the Creator) Hormazd!'* The Holy Immortals! '® The Fravashis’’ (the Guardi-
an Spirits) of the righteous! and * may this”? (homage) reach’? Vayu yazata?!
created of the long period!”

(3) "Ferastuye! humatdibyascha? hukhtdibyascha? hvarshtoi-
byascha,* manthwoibyascha*> vakhedhwoibyascha® varshtvoibyascha.’
Aibi-gairya daithe® vispa? humatacha"” hikhtacha" hvarshtacha.” Paiti-
richya daithe’’ vispa'* dushmatacha'* duzhikhtacha’ duzhvarshtacha.””
(4) Fera ve'® rahi’? Amesha Spenta”’ yasnemcha?'! vahmemcha” fera
manangha” fera vachangha™ fera shyaothana™, fera anghuya”, fera
tanvaschit”’ khvakhyao”* ushtanem.” Staomi*’ Ashem;*! Ashem Vohii 1.

(3) I praise! (all) good thoughts,” good words’ and good deeds* through
(my) thoughts,° words® and deeds.’ I uphold® all’ good thoughts,’” good
words" and good deeds.’ I renounce’? all’* evil thoughts,'* evil words’® and
evil deeds.'’ (4) I dedicate'® unto you,'* ye Holy Immortals,” worship”! and
praise” (and) with the very life? of my own” body’’ through thoughts,”

bh For the translation of this paragraph, see Srosh Baz above.
bi For the translation and explanation of this, see Hormazd Khoday above.

bj i.e. O Creator Hormazd I pay homage unto Thy best-created things, (but) prior to that I pay
homage unto Thee thrice.

bk Lord of long duration or period (Darmesteter).

bl The entire kardah-section of “Ferastuye” is called, “Avestan Patet”’. This section is taken from
Yasna Ha 11.


--- Page 35 ---

KHORSHED NYAYESH 19

words” and deeds” (and) with (my) conscience.” I praise*’ righteousness.*?

(5) (To recite bowing the head) Nem6! Ahurai Mazdai,? nem6! Ahurai
Mazdai,’? nemd! Ahurai Mazdai;? nemo? Ameshaéiby6 Spentaéibyo,*
nemo> Mithrai®’ vourugaoyaoitée,’ nemo? Hvare-khshaétai’? aurvat-
aspai,"° nemo" abyo” doithrabyo," yao’! Ahurahe Mazdao;' nemo"
géush,'’ nem6" gayehe,” nem6” Zarathushtrahe”! Spitamahe” ashaond”
fravashée,4 Nemem” vispayao” ashaond?’ stdish*® haithyaicha”
bavanithyaicha” '” bishyanithyaicha.”!

(5) (May there be) homage’ unto (the Creator) Ahura Mazda!” unto the
Holy Immortals!* unto Meher yazata,® the lord of wide pastures!’ and unto ™
the swift-footed horse’? Khorshed yazata!® (May there be) homage’! unto
these” two eyes" that!* (are) of °° Ahura Mazda!!° Unto the Fravashi** of the
first-created Bull!’ (i.e. of Gavyodad)! Unto the Fravashi** of Gayomard’”!
(And) may there be homage” unto the Fravashi** of Zarathushtra,”’ the
Spitaman!” (May there be) homage” unto the entire** creation”® of the right-
eous”’ (Ahura Mazda)?’ that is,”? coming into being®? and °° that will be!*!

(If the Gah is Havan, recite as under):

Vohi ukhshya*? manangha*™ khshathra*® ashacha* ushta*’ “tanim*
(to be recited three times) Ashem Vohii 3.

Do Thou strengthen (my) body*® (O! Hormazd) through good”
thoughts,** righteousness,” strength*> (or power**) and prosperity.*”

(During the Gah Rapithwan or Second Havan, recite as under):

Ima?’ raochio” barezishtem** ""barezemanim* (to be recited three
times). Ashem Vohi 3.

This*’ highest*’ light** amongst the high (lights)* (which is called the
Sun; we regard it as Thy most beautiful body, O Hormazd.

(If the Gah is Uzirin, recite as under):

Yahmi"! Spenta® thwa® mainyi“ urvaése* jas“ (to be recited three
times). Ashem Vohii 3.

bm The portion beginning with “Nemo Ahurai Mazdai” up to “bushyanithyaicha” is taken from
the Yasna Ha 68, para 22.

bn This is described figuratively. In reality there are no horses harnessed, but we notice that the
movement of the Sun is faster than the Moon.

bo Sun is considered the eyes of Ahura Mazda, also the moon.

bp The creation which is present, which was beforehand and which will be hereafter
(Darmesteter).

bq This sentence to be recited during the Havan Gah is taken from Yasna Ha 33, Stanza 10
known as “Yatha aish”.

br These words to be recited during Rapithwan Gah are taken from Yasna Ha 36, para 6, known
as “ahya thwa athro”.


--- Page 36 ---

20 KHORDEH AVESTA

At which*! end* (O! Hormazd Thou art coming) with Thy* bountiful”
Spirit“ (i.e. Spena Mino).

(6) Hvare-khshaétem' ameshem’ raém? aurvat-aspem* yazamaide.*
Mithrem® Vouru-gaoyaoitim’ yazamaide,® arsh-vachanghem,”’
vyakhanem,"° hazanghra-gaoshem," hutashtem,”” baévare-
chashmanem," berezantem," —_perethu-vaédhayanem** sirem’®
akhvafnem’” jaghaur-vaonghem.'’* (7) Mithrem”  vispanam”’
dakhyunam?! danghu-paitim” yazamaide,* yim™ fradathat?> Ahurd
Mazdao,”* khvarenanguhastemem”’ mainyavanam” yazatanam,” Tat”?
nd"! jamyat” avanghe® Mithra*‘ Ahura® berezanta.**> Hvarekhshaétem*”
ameshem* raém”® aurvat-aspem” yazamaide."!

(6) We praise* the immortal,’ radiant? and the swift-footed horse,’ the
Sun.' We praise® Meher yazata® of wide pastures’ (who is) the speaker of true
word,’ the sitter in the assembly,’ “of thousand ears,'! well-shaped,’? ten
thousand eyes,’ the exalted,’* surveying from a watch-tower or large fort-
ress,'> brave,'° sleepless!’ (and) ever-wakeful.'* (7) We praise*? (him) the
lord” of all? countries! (who is) Meher Yazata,'’? whom™ Ahura Mazda’°
created” the most glorious’’ of the spiritual”® yazatas.”” May the exalted*®
Meher Yazata™ and Ahura Mazda*> come” ™here® for our®! help!>> We
praise“! the immortal,** radiant*’ and the swift-footed horse,*° the Sun.*”

(8) Tishtrim®? drvé-chashmanem* yazamaide,“ Tishtrim drv6-
chashmanem yazamaide, Tishtrim drv6d-chashmanem  yazamaide.
Tistrim*® yazamaide,** Tistryenyo“ yazamaide,* Tishtryo” raévao™
khvarenanguhao* yazamaide,” vanantem™ starem™ mazdadhatem™
yazamaide, Tishtrim*’ starem*® raévantem.” khvarenanguhantem®
yazamaide,®*| thwashem® khvadhatem® yazamaide,“ zrvanem®
akaranem® yazamaide,” zrvanem® daregh6-khvadhatem” yazamaide.”
Vatem”! spentem” hudhaonghem” yazamaide,” razishtam”™ chishtam”
Mazdadhatam” ashaonim’® yazamaide.” Daénam® vanguhim?!
mazdayasnim®” yazamaide.* Patham*™ khvastaitim® yazamaide,*
zarenumantem®’ sirem**  yazamaide,”  saokantem™”  gairim?!
mazdadhatem” yazamaide”

(9) Vispemcha™* ashavanem® mainyaom*’ yazatem” yazamaide,”
vispemcha” ashavanem'” gaéthim' yazatem’? yazamaide,> haom*
urvanem*® yazamaide,® havam’ fravashim® yazamaide.’ Jasa'’ me"!
avanghe’” Mazda.'* Ashaunaéam'™ vanguhish'’ sirao'’ spentao"”’
fravashayo" yazamaide.’? Hvare-khshaétem” ameshem”' raém” aurvat-

bs These words to be recited during Uzirin Gah are taken from Yasna Ha 43, Stanza 6.

bt Among the epithets of Meher yazata there occurs “of a thousand ears and ten thousand eyes”;
its significance is that his power of hearing is as sharp as or is equal to a thousand ears and his
power of vision is as powerful as of ten thousand eyes.

bu tat = Sanskrit tad, meaning “here, so, in this way”.


--- Page 37 ---

KHORSHED NYAYESH 21

aspem” yazamaide.* Ashem Vohii 3.

(8) We praise“ Tishtrya*” (yazata) ’Yof sound eyes.** We praise“ (the star)
we praise*®  Tishtrya,* ™ those-belonging-to-Tishtrya.” We praise
Tishtrya,” the radiant (and) glorious.*! We praise”! the star** *’Vanant,° cre-
ated by Mazda.* We praise®! the star®* Tishtrya,*’ the radiant* (and) glori-
ous. We praise™ the Sky” that follows its own law.%

We praise®’ the Boundless (eternal) Time, the Time® appointed-for-
the-long-period,® the Wind’! (or Govad yazata),”’ bountiful” (and) of good
creation.’ We praise” Wisdom,” the most upright,” righteous,” created by
Mazda” (i.e. Religious education), the good*! Mazdayasnian® Religion,*°
the chosen® (path) amongst other paths,** the terrible®’ “weapon,** and the
Mount”! Saokant,” created by Mazda.”

(9) We praise” every” righteous” spiritual®® yazata;*’ (and) every” right-

eous!”° yazata’ pertaining to this world.! We praise® our own’ “Fravashi’.
Come” to my!’ help,’? O (Creator) Hormazd!? We praise’? the good,'°
strong,'® (and) beneficent'’ Fravashis'® of the righteous (people).** We praise
the immortal,”' radiant** (and) swift-footed horse,** the Sun.”°

bv Its meaning can also be “giver of sound eyes”.

bw Tishtar is the name of the most brilliant star in the constellation Canis Major in the East.
This star is compared to Sirius or Dog Star in English.

bx The meaning of “those related to star Tishtar” is, other stars associated with Tishtar, i.e. all
other stars of the same constellation in which Tishtar (Sirius) comes. This constellation is called
Canis Major. “Rains produced by Tishtrya” (Darmesteter).

by Vanant is, the central star in the West and the most brilliant. This star Fomalhaut are gener-
ally regarded as the same. It is called the opponent of the planet Jupiter.

bz or steadfast, of straight forward morals (khva4+ staiti).

ca Avesta word Sura as compared with Sanskrit shula is translated by me as “weapon”. Accord-
ing to my view, a reference here is made about the weapon of Meher yazad or Srosh yazad. In
its corroboration we get actual Avestan writing from other places. In para 96 of the Meher yasht
it is stated that, in order to smite the wicked and the sinful persons, Meher yazata keeps a heavy
mace in his hand. Moreover, it is stated in karda 12 of Srosh yasht large and in para 15 of Ven-
didad 8 fargard 19, that Srosh yazata keeps a powerful weapon in his hands for smiting the
skulls of demons. The original meaning of Zarenumantem is “wrathful” and I have derived the
meaning “terrible, horrible” from it. Avesta word Zarenu = (German) Zorn = wrath, anger.

cb Fravashi and soul are two quite different things, they are not one and the same as most of our
Zoroastrians think. This will be clearly seen from this paragraph as well as from para 149 of
Fravartin yasht and from yasna Has 26 and 55 respectively. Fravashi, i.e. a spiritual element
showing the path of goodness and heaven to the soul about Fravashi in the Avesta it is men-
tioned that the Fravashis of all living beings, of those dead and those that shall be born hereafter,
are different and varied. In support thereof see yasna Ha 24, para 5. Moreover, another meaning
of “Fravashi”, (similar to English Prototype), is also “Original specimen, original form, original
root” of anything, e.g. the Fravashi of trees and plants is its root, seed. There is a spiritual ele -
ment in the body of man which is responsible in the world beyond, for good or bad deeds done
by him in this world; its name is “soul”. The soul attains heaven or hell in accordance with the
deeds done by it in the world, see my translation of Vendidad, fargard 19, paras 27-32.


--- Page 38 ---

22 KHORDEH AVESTA

(10) Fravarane mazdayasno zarathushtrish vidaévd Ahura-tkaésho
(Gah according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Hvare-
khshaétahe’ ameshahe*® raévahe’ aurvat-aspahe,'? khshnaothra"™
yasnaicha” vahmaicha™ khshnaothraicha™ frasastayaécha,' yatha ahi
vairyo'® zaota!’ fra me'* mrite,!’? atha ratush ashat-chit hacha,” fra
ashava’! vidhvao” mraoti.”

(10) For the propitiation'’ (of the Creator Ahura Mazda) (during such and
such Gah), for the worship” of the immortal,* radiant? (and) swift-footed
horse,'° the Sun, for (its) veneration,’? propitiation'* and glorification,'> the
officiating-priest'’ (Zaotar)'’ may proclaim’? unto me'® excellences of the
verse “Yatha Ahi Vairy6”’® let (the Raspi who is) righteous”! (and) learned?
°*pronounce” (the excellences of the verse) “Atha ratush ashat-chit hacha”.*°

(11) “‘Hvare-khshaétem! ameshem? raém aurvat-aspem‘ yazamaide.°
Aat yat® hvare’-raokhshni* tapayeiti,? dat yat' hvare-raocho" tapyeiti,!”
hishtenti’ mainyavaongh6o" yazataongho,' satemcha'® hazangremcha;"”
tat'® khvaren6” ham-barayeinti,” tat?! khvarend” niparayeinti,” tat’
khvaren6** bakhshenti,”° zim?’ paiti?® ahuradhatam,” fradhaticha®
ashahe*! gaéthao,” fradhaticha® ashahe™ tanuye,* fradhaticha® hvare*”
yat*® ameshem” raém“ aurvat-aspem.”!

(11) We praise*® the immortal,* radiant* (and) swift-footed horse,* the
Sun.' When* the “light® of the Sun’ is warmer,’ when’? it'’ shines,’* there
stand’? hundreds'® and thousands” spiritual'* yazatas.'° (These yazats) gather
together” that'® glory,'® (and) send it down.” (And) distribute’ (or spread)’®
that* glory*> upon’ the earth?’ created by Mazda.” The immortal*’ radiant*®
(and) swift-footed horse, (Sun) increases.*°

(What does it increase or make prosperous ?) It increases** the world? of
righteousness,*! the “‘creation* of righteousness.™4

Explanation: In order to reach the earth the light of the Sun and the Moon it
is necessary to have air and “ether”. Without air and ether the light of the Sun
and Moon cannot fall on this earth. Mithra, i.e. Meher, means the light; “Ram
Khvastar” is equivalent to “ether” and “Vayu upar6-kairyo” is the wind, air
between the sky and the earth. Like the close relationship of light, air and ether,
we find in the Avesta, allegorically, yazatas; it is the Khshnuman or propitiatory
formula of Mithra, i.e. Meher yazad. “Ram Khvastar” is associated with Meher

cc For its explanation, see Srosh Baz, page 16.

cd The portion from here up to the word, “Yasnemcha” is taken from the Khorshed Yasht. It is
noticed that this entire Yasht and various paragraphs of Yasna, as mentioned above, are incor-
porated in the Khorshed Nyayesh.

ce Taking hvare-raokhshni as a compound, if the reading according to Geldner, “hvare raokh-
shne” is taken, it means, “When the Sun warms with its light”.

cf In the original Avesta this word is found as dative singular (tongue), its original meaning is
the body. Darmesteter translates, “germs’’.


--- Page 39 ---

KHORSHED NYAYESH 23

yazad. Moreover, there occurs, “Ram Khvastar” in the “Khshnuman” of Mino
Ram. Besides, in the Khshnuman of Mino Ram there occurs “Vayu uparo-
kairya” along with “Ram Khvastar”. As per this allegory “Ram Khvastar” and
“Vayu uparo-kairya” and other yazatas stand to help the light of the Sun and the
Moon to reach the earth. Without the help of these angels, natural light cannot
fall upon the earth.

(12) Aat yat! hvare? uzukhshyeiti,? bvat‘ zam5 Ahuradhatam®
yaozdathrem,’ Apem* tachintam? yaodathrem,'° apem" khanyam”?
yaozdathrem,” apem" zrayanam' yaozdathrem,” 4pem"” armaéshtam'®
yaozdathrem,” bvat?? dama ashava” yaozdathrem,” yao'* henti*
spentahe mainyéush.”

When! the Sun’ rises? it becomes’ the means of purifying’ the earth® cre-
ated by Ahura-Mazda,° (it becomes) the means of purifying’? flowing’ wa-
ters,* spring'*-waters,'' waters'* of the seas,'> stagnant'* waters'’ (and), it be-
comes” the means of purifying”* the righteous” creation,”’ which” is** of the
Holy Spirit.”°

(13) Yedhi' zi’ hvare’® nodit+ uz-ukhshyeiti,, adha® daéva’ vispao®
merenchinti’ yao" henti," haptd-karshvohva” nava'’ chish'* mainyava’®
yazata’’ anghava” astvaiti'® paiti-dram” nodit” paitishtam7' vidhenti.”

For' if? the Sun? were not* to rise> the demons’ here® would kill’ (or “de-
stroy’) all® (things and lives) that! are!' in the seven “regions.'? Then any
spiritual’ yazatas'® even would not find “support in this material world.

(14) Y6! yazaite? hvare> yat' ameshem* raém* aurvat-aspem,’
paitishtatée® temangham,” paitishtatée’’ temaschithranam" daévanam,'”
paitishtatée'> tayunamcha™ hazasnamcha,'* paitishtatée'® yatunamcha”’
pairikanamcha," paitishtatée” ithyejangho” marshaonahe,”' yazaite.”
Ahurem Mazdam,” yazaite* Ameshe Spente,* yazaite’® haom”’
“urvanem,” khshnavayeiti?’ vispe”’ mainyavacha* yazata” gaéthyacha,*

cg All living things of this world enjoy their existence from the light of the Sun. Without it man,
animal, bird, tree, etc., cannot subsist. Here the meaning of the word, “daevas’, as mentioned in
the notes is “Srosh Baz”, pp. 15-16, should be understood as “foul air, miasma, producing
plague, means of disturbing prosperity”.

ch According to Avestan writing, the entire Universe is divided into seven regions which are
called “Keshvar”. Their names are:-(1) Arezahi (to the West), (2) Savahi (to the East), (3)
fradadafshu (to the South-West), (4) vidadafshu, (to the south-east), (5) Vouru-bareshti (to the
North-West), (6) Vouru-Jareshti (to the North-East), (7) Khvaniratha (in the centre of the above-
mentioned six regions). Moreover, this last region called “Khvaniratha”, is stated to be the
largest and most splendid of all other regions. Even at present we call the entire universe as,
“Hafte Keshvar Zamin”.

ci or the power of repelling (the daevas) (Sanskrit pratishtha). Darmesteter translates the word
by, “cannot withstand the daevas and oppose them.”

cj Dr. Geldner from here up to “urvanem” takes as a poem of three lines, each line begins with
“yazaite”’.


--- Page 40 ---

24 KHORDEH AVESTA

yo™ yazaite*> hvare* yat?” ameshem** raém”® aurvat-aspem.”

Whosoever’ worships’ (or praises”) the Sun? that* is immortal,° radiant,°
swift-footed horse,’ in order to withstand® darkness,’ the demons,” the brood
of darkness," the thieves'* and robbers,’° the wizards!’ and witches'® (and)
the deadly”! destruction,” he (as it were) worships** Ahura Mazda,”* he wor-
ships* the Holy Immortals,” he worships”® his own?’ soul.*® He who** wor-
ships** the Sun,*° propitiates” all*? heavenly*' and earthly® yazatas.”

(15) Yazai' mithrem’? vouru-gaoyaoitim’ hazanghra-gaoshem,*
baévare-chashmanem,> yazai® vazrem’ hunivikhtem,® kameredhe’ paiti'®
daévanam," mithrahe” vouru-gaoyaoitodish,’ yazai'* hakhedhremcha,
yat’® asti'’ hakhedhranam™ vahishtem,” antare?” maonghemcha”!
hvarecha.”

I praise’ Meher yazata,’ the lord of wide pastures,* of a thousand ears*
(and) of ten thousand eyes,’ I praise® the “mace’ of Mithra,"” the lord of wide
pastures, '° “sufficiently made ponderous’, weighty (for smiting) against'® the
skull’ of the Demons."

I praise’* the best'® friendship’ of friendships'® which’® is!’ between! the
Moon”! and the Sun.”

(16) Ahe! raya? khvarenanghacha,’ tem‘ yazai> surunvata® yasna,’
hvare-khshaétem® ameshem’ raém” aurvat-aspem." zaothraby6” hvare-
khshaétem' ameshem" raém'* aurvat-aspem"* yazamaide.””

On account of his! radiance’ and glory? I worship’ that* immortal,° radi-
ant’? (and) swift-footed horse!’ Sun* with the ‘“audible® (or famous’) yasna.”
We worship'’ the immortal,'* radiant'> (and) swift-footed horse,'® Sun,'? with
“libations.”

Haomayo'* gava’’ baresmana,”’ hizvoé-danghangha,’? manthracha,”
vachacha® shyaothnacha™ zaothrabyascha* arshukhdhaéibyascha”
vaghziby6.”’

(We who are) the performers of Haoma-ceremony’ (or the acknowledgers

ck If the meaning of Meher is taken as light, origin of light, body of light, as stated previously
the significance of “the ponderous mace of Meher yazata for smiting the skulls of Demons” is to
be understood figuratively as sharp rays of the Sun for destroying disease and plague-producing
foul air. The meaning of Daeva in this place, as explained in the notes on pages 15-16 can be
taken as “foul air”. Whatever foul air is accumulated owing to the absence of the Sun during the
whole night, is destroyed by its brilliant light after the sunrise.

cl root vij = to weigh. “Well-struck down” (Prof. Darmesteter), well-aimed (Prof. Harlez), well-
utilized (Dr. Spiegel).

cm “Traditional” (Prof. Darmesteter)

cn Dr. Geldner takes the word “Zaothrabyo (with libations) occurring in the para of “Ahe raya

khvarenanghacha” of every Nyayesh and every yasht with the preceding word “Yazai” (I wor-
ship).


--- Page 41 ---

KHORSHED NYAYESH 25

of the Haoma-ceremony'), (“worship the Sun) with milk,? Baresman,? skill
of tongue,* with the Holy Spell,* and with (good) word,° (good) deed,’ obla-
tions® (offerings) and rightly spoken’ words.'°

Explanation: (From the writings of the Avesta we have seen that the ce-
remonies of Haoma and Baresman, which are current at present in our holy
Religion, were from the very ancient times, even prior to the advent of Za-
rathushtra. In the yasna Ha 9 (Havanim) it is stated that Vivanghane, the
father of King Jamshid; Athawyan, the father of Faredoon; Asrat, the father
of Keresasp, and Pourushaspa, the father of the Prophet Zarathushtra, per-
formed the Haoma ceremony. Haoma twigs (Sanskrit Soma) are the twigs of
a plant. These twigs are brought from Iran where they grow in large quantit-
ies. As a rule, fresh and green Haoma twigs should be used in the ceremonial
act so that while pounding in the mortar (Havanim) juice will come out.
These Haoma twigs should be regarded as strength giving and healthy medi-
cine like several tonics used at present. We get the description of its excel-
lence from Yasna Ha 9 and 10. In ancient times, prior to the advent of Za-
rathushtra, there existed a prophet by name Haoma, the discoverer of the
method of extracting the Haoma-juice by pounding the Haoma twigs and of
the introduction of the Haoma cult.

Like Haoma, the baresman, too, are the twigs of a certain kind of tree.
This tree grows in Iran. Each twig is known as “Tay”. Nowadays, brass or
silver wires are used in place of the original baresman twigs in our ceremon-
ies. The number of these wires is not always used uniformly, but it varies ac -
cording to the ceremony to be performed. It is not positively known who
founded the baresman ceremony, but its ceremony, too, like the cult of
Haoma is most ancient and this is ascertained from the Ram Yasht. In the
second “kardah” of this yasht it is stated that King Hoshang of the
Pishdadian Dynasty worshipped Mino Ram yazata by means of Baresman on
the Mount Alborz. In the first “kardah” of Srosh Yasht Vadi (Large) it is
stated that Srosh yazata was the first to worship the Creator, Ahura Mazda,
by means of Baresman.

With some special process and by reciting certain sacred verses of the
Avesta, in the yazishn Gah (Gah = place), the priest (yaozdathregar) draws
milk from the she-goat in the purified goblet which is called “Jivam”’.

“PYenghe” hatam'* dat'* yesne’> paiti'® vangho'!’ Mazdao Ahuro'®
vaétha ashat” hacha,”’ Yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha™ yazamaide.”*

co The above verb, “yazamaide” should be taken here again. “Haomay6” is first person plural of
the word “haomi” (the performer of Haoma Ceremony). If the words “haoma yo” are taken sep-
arately they can be translated as: (We worship the Sun) with Haoma which is with milk (and)
barsam (and that Haoma) which is with the thought, word and deed, with the skill of the tongue,
and (with that Haoma which is prepared) with rightly spoken words’ for the ceremonial obla-
tion.’

cp For the explanation of Yenghe Hatam, see note p. 1.


--- Page 42 ---

26 KHORDEH AVESTA

Among the living beings’? whoever” (is) better!’ in acts of worship,'*'° of
which” Ahura Mazda'® (Himself) is aware,'? on account”’ of His holiness”,
all such”? men? and women” we revere.”

(To pray in baz, i.e. murmur) “Hormazd' Khodae,’ awazinie’
mardum* mardum* sardagan,° hama’ sardagan,® hambayaste’ vehan,’
oem’ behedin' mazdayasnan’ agahi astavani'* neki'’ rasanad'®
aedin’’ bad'* (To recite aloud:) Yatha Ahw Vairyo 2.

O Lord? (of the entire world) Hormazd' (the Creator)! and the Increaser?
of man* and mankind*® (and of the creation) of all’ (other) species*! O!
Bountiful (Lord) of all the faithful of the good Religion!’ May I'° the faith-
ful’ amongst the Mazda-worshippers” (gain) the knowledge’? (of the Reli-
gion) and may I become steadfast on the Religion'* and may goodness"®
reach'® (me)! May it be so! (i.e. may the blessings which I ask be fulfilled!)

(17) Yasnemcha! vahmemch2? aojascha? zavarecha‘ afrinami,* hvare-
khshaétahe® ameshahe’ raévahe’ aurvat-aspahe.’ Ashem Vohi 3.

“T praise? the worship,’ glorification,? skill’ (or efficaciousness)* and
strength’ of the immortal,’ radiant® and swift-footed horse,’ Sun.°

(17) Ahuranish! ahurahe? vahishtaby6*? zaothraby6 sraéshtabyd°
zaothrabyo,° dahm6-pairi-angharshtaby0’ zaothrabyo.® Ashem Vohi 1.
Ahmai? raéshcha’’ khvarenascha," ahmai’ tanv6" dravatatem,'
ahmai'> tanvé"* vazdvare,'’ ahmai!® tanv6” verethrem,”’ ahmai”! ishtim”
pourushkhvathram,”™ ahmai** aAsnamchit* frazantim,® ahmai”’
daregham” dareghd-jitim,” ahmai*® vahishtem ahim*! ashaonam,*”
raochanghem* vispo-khvathrem.* Atha* jamyat* yatha*’ afrinami,*
Ashem Vohi 1.

“Hazanghrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh Mozd.

(18) (Whoever worships thee, the immortal, radiant and swift-footed
horse, the Sun) of Ahura Mazda and pertaining to Ahura! Mazda with best?
“oblations,* with excellent® oblations,® (and) with oblations® filtered by the
pious people,’ (do, thou, O! Khorshed yazata! grant) radiance’® and glory"

cq This entire portion to be murmured is in Pazend. The reason being it is the Pazend language,
which is different from that of the Avesta. Therefore it cannot be prayed aloud. This is so done
as, recitation of a certain portion of the Avesta is left out after reciting the Pazend portion.
Whatever Pazend passages that occur before the Avestan text or at its end are not to be recited in
murmur but are recited aloud.

cr The same, “Khshnuman” (or propitatory formula) which occurs in the Khshnuman “Frav-
arane Mazadayasno” in every Nyadyesh and every yasht also occurs in the Khshnuman “Yas-
nemcha”. After giving the translation of “Yasnemcha” here I have not thought it essential to
translate it again anywhere.

cs As regards Avestan text and translation of this para, see above.

ct “Zor” - libation, i.e. a thing that is offered in sacred religious ceremony; milk, water, food, dry
fruits, etc., consecrated ceremonially.


--- Page 43 ---

KHORSHED NYAYESH 27

unto that man’; do thou grant him’? soundness’* of the body’? (i.e. health),
happiness,’’ victory” of the body,'? wealth”, full of happiness,” progeny,”°
naturally intelligent,” do thou grant him,”’ long life;?? (and do thou grant)
him*? the bright*? (and) happy heaven"! of the righteous.** May it be** so** as?’
I pray** (i.e. may all the blessings be fulfilled).

Explanation: Both these passages “Ahuranish” and “Ahmai Raéshcha”,
are quoted here from yasna Ha 68, sections 10-11. In the same Ha or chapter
some description about water is given, in which prior to “Ahuranish” the fol-
lowing appropriate words have come; “YO vO apd vanguhish yazaite
ahuranish ahurahe” etc. ... “ahmai raeshcha khvarenascha ... dayata” i.e. (the
consecrator speaks of water.)! “Whosoever worships water, O! Ahura Mazda,
and those pertaining to Ahura Mazda, with the most excellent oblations (do
grant radiance and glory) to him (O! Holy Waters of Ahura Mazda!), etc.

“Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan)! mahe mubarak
(falan),? gahe (falan),> namaz* dadare> gehan® “daman.’ Kshnaothra
Ahurahe Mazdao, tardidite anghrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat
vasna ferashotemem. Staomi Ashem ; Ashem Vohi 1.

Homage be unto the Creator of (the entire) universe on the day (N or M)
of good and holy auspicious name, in the month (N or M) of the auspicious
name, of the period (N or M) of the day!

Gorje' khoreh? awazayad’ khorshed* amarg> rayOmand® aurvad-
asp,’ be-rasad* amavand? pirozgar’ amavandih" pirozgari.'’? Dad'> din“
beh'S Mazdayasnan’® agahi”’ ravai'® goafrangani’? bad” hafte keshvar
zamin”' aedin” bad.* Man™ ano* awayad” shudan, man ano 4wayad
shudan, man 4no awayad Shudan. Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

May’ the lustre! and glory’ of the immortal,° radiant,° swift-footed horse’-
sun*-increase!*> May (that) courageous® (and) victorious’? “(Khorshed
yazata) come® (to my help) for courage’! and victory’*! May there be”
justice’? of the good'> Mazda-worshipping'® Religion,'* (its) knowledge,'”
promulgation'® and fame’? (or glory'’) in the seven regions of the earth!?!
May it be® so!” I** ought to go”* there.” (To be recited facing the South)

Dadare' gehan’? dine Mazdayasni dade Zarthushti Nemase-te ashaum
sévishte Aredvi Stra Anahite Ashaone Ashem Vohii 1. Nemo urvaire
vanguhi mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

cu In every Nyayesh and yasht, the portion from “Roz Nek Nam” up to “gehan daman” and the
entire para of “Gorge khoreh awazayad” and ““Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade Zarthusti”
and the final sentence at the end are in Pazend.

cv As regards its translation and explanation, see pp. 7-9.

cw Whatever “Khshnuman” that occurs in the introduction of each Nyayesh and yasht also oc-
curs in the portion of “Gorje Khoreh” with the same khshnuman. After giving the translation of
the portion, there is no need of giving again in every Nyayesh and yasht.


--- Page 44 ---

28 KHORDEH AVESTA

The Mazdayasnian‘ religion’ (and) the law° (proclaimed) by the Prophet
Zarathushtra (has been received from Ahura Mazda), the Creator! of the
world’. Homage (be) unto thee, O righteous* most profitable’? and undefiled
“Ardevi Sura'®! Homage” (be) (unto thee) O good", righteous’®, Tree’? cre-
ated by the (Creator) Ahura Mazda’!

Hvare-khshaétem' ameshem? raém* aurvat-aspem* yazamaide’.
Ashem Vohi 1. Khorshed amarg rayOmand aurvad-asp_be-rasad.
Ashem Vohi 1.

We praise?! the immortal'’, radiant!? (and) swift-footed-horse”, Sun!’.
May the immortal*, radiant and swift-footed horse”, Khorshed (yazata)
come (to my help).

MEHER NYAYESH

“(It is enjoined in the Persian Rivayet to recite this Nyayesh everyday
during the day-time in the three Gahs: Havan, Rapithwan, and Uzirin).

Pa name! yazdan? Hormazd? Khodae* awazini gorje’ khoreh’
awazayad;® Meher’ faragayaod’’ davare rast" be-rasad.’ Az hama
gunah patet pashemanum; az_ harvastin dushmata_ duzhukta
duzhvarshta. Mem pa geti manid; oem goft, oem kard, oem jast. oem
bin bid ested ; az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani ravani
geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pashem§an pa sé gavashni pa patet hom.

(I begin to recite this) with’ (the help of) the name! of the Almighty’
Hormazd,* Lord? (of the entire world) and the Increaser.* May His grandeur®
and glory’ increase!* May Meher yazata,’ the Lord of wide pastures,’° the
“Yyust Judge! come’’ (to my help)!

(1) (To recite with a bow) Nemase-te Ahura Mazda, nemase-te Ahura
Mazda, nemase-te Ahura Mazda, thrishchit pard anyaish daman. Nemo
vé Amesha Spenta vispe hvare-hazaoshao. Aétat jahat Ahurem Mazdam,
aétat Ameshe Spente, aétat ashaon4am fravashish, aétat vayam daregho-
khvadhatem.

cx There are various meanings of the word Meher, who is called in Avesta ““Mithra” light, origin
of light, the harbinger of the Sun, twilight; a contract, promise, an agreement, truth, justice,
friendship, love; the yazata presiding over light and truthfulness; the yazata helping the just and
virtuous persons and punishing the liar and wicked persons; the judge at the Chinvat Bridge of
the souls of the dead. We have the full details about the functions of Meher Yazata and his praise
from the Meher Yasht. In former times the worship of Meher yazata was spread more than that
of the other yazatas. Some hint about it is seen from the later portion of Meher Nyayesh and
Meher Yasht. For further details, see a booklet in English on “A Lecture on Mithraic Worship”,
by Sheth Kharshedji Rustomji Kama.

cy Meher yazata is called the just Judge. Its reason is that after the passing away of a person he
proceeds towards the Chinvat Bridge on the fourth day at dawn, where Meher Yazata, Srosh
Yazata and Rashne Yazata, after weighing all the actions committed by him in this world, assign
him the proper place (Heaven, purgatory or hell).


--- Page 45 ---

MEHER NYAYESH 29

(2) Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, taroidite anghrahe mainyéush.
Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi ashem “Ashem
Vohi 1.

(3) Ferastuye humatodibyascha hikhtdibyascha hvarshtodibyascha,
manthwoibyascha vakhedhwoibyascha varshtvoibyascha. Aibigairya
daithe vispa humatacha hikhtacha hvarshtacha. Paitirichya daithe
vispa4 dushmatacha duzhakhtacha duzhvarshtacha.

(4) Fera ve rahi, Amesha Spenta, yasnemcha vahmemcha, fera
manangha, fera vachangha, fera shyaothana, fera anghuya fera
tanvaschit khvakhyao ushtanem. Staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohi 1.

(5) (To recite bowing the head) Nem6 Ahurai Mazdai, nemo Ahurdai
mazdai, nemo Ahurai Mazdai; nemo Ameshaéibyo Spentatibyo, Nemo
mithrai vouru-gaoyaotée, nemo hvare-khshaétai aurvat-aspai, nemOd
abyOd ddithrabyd, yao Ahurahe Mazdao, nemo géush, nemd gayehe,
nemo Zarathushtrahe Spitamahe ashaonOd fravashée nemem vispayao
ashaon6 stdish, haithyaicha, bavanithyaicha bishyanithydaicha.

(If the Gah is Havan, recite three times as under):

Vohi ukhshyaé manangha khshathra ashacha ushta taniim (to be re-
cited three times). Ashem Vohi 3.

(If the Gah is Rapithwan or Second Havan, recite three times as under):
Im4 raochAao barezishtem Barezemanam. Ashem Vohi 3.
(If the Gah is Uzirin, recite three times as under):

Yahmi Spenta thwa mainyii urvaése jaso (to be recited). Ashem Vohi

(6) “Mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitim yazamaide, arshvachanghem,
vyakhanem hazanghragaoshem, hutashtem, baévare-chashmanem,
berezantem, perethu-vaédhayanem surem, akhvafnem,
jaghaurvaoghem. (7) Mithrem vispanaim dakhyunaim danghu-paitim
yazamaide, yim fradathat Ahurd Mazdao khvarenanguhastemem
mainyavanam yazatanam. Tat nd jamyat avanghe Mithra Ahura
berezanta. Hvare-khshaétem ameshem raém aurvat aspem yazamaide.
(8) Tishtrim drvé-chashmanem yazamaide,_ Trishtrim  drvo-
chashmanem yazamaide, Tishtrim drv6d-chashmanem  yazamaide,
Tishtrim yazamaide, Tishtryenyd yazamaide, TrishtryO raé vao
khvarenanghuhao yazamaide, vanantem’ starem mazdadhatem
yazamaide,_ tishtrim starem  raévantem  khvarenanghuhantem
yazamaide, thwashem khvadhatem yazamaide, zrvanem akaranem

cz For its translations, see Khorshed Nyayesh above.

da For its translation, see Khorshed Nyayesh, above.


--- Page 46 ---

30 KHORDEH AVESTA

yazamaide, zrvanem dareghd-khvadhatem yazamaide, vatem spentem
hudhaonghem yazamaide, razishtam chistam mazdadhatam ashaonim
yazamaide, daénam vanghuhim méazdayasnim yazamaide, patham
khvastaitim yazamaide, zarenumantem sirem yazamaide, saokantem
gairim mazdadhatem yazamaide.

(9) Vispemcha ashavanem mainyaom yazatem yazamaide, vispemcha
ashavanem gaéthim yazatem yazamaide, haom urvanem yazamaide
havam fravashim yazamaide. Jasa me avanghe Mazda. Ashaunaim
vanghuhish siirdo spentao fravashayd yazamaide”. Mithrem vouru-
gaoyaoitim yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 3.

(10) Fravarane mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévd Ahura-tkaésho
(Gah according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Mithrahe vouru-
gaoyaoitdish hazanghra-gaoshahe baévare-chashmand, aokht0-namand
yazatahe, ramnascha khvastrahe “khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi vairyd zaota fra me mrite,
atha ratush ashat-chit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti.

(11) Mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitim yazamaide, arsh-vachanghem,
vyakhnem, hazanghra-gaoshem, hutashtem, baévare-chashmanem,
berezantem, perethu-vaédhayanem, surem, akhvafnem,
““aghaurvaonghem.

Mithrem™ aiwi-dakhyam' yazamaide,'® mithrem'” antare-
dakhyim" yazamaide;” mithrem” 4-dakhyim”! yazamaide,” mithrem”
upairi-dakhyam™ yazamaide,”* mithrem”° adhairi-dakhyim”’
yazamaide* mithrem” pairi-dakhyaim*” yazamaide;*' mithrem” aipi-
dakhyim* yazamaide.* (12) Mithra*® Ahura*  berezanta*’
aithyejangha®* ashavana® yazamaide”, stréushcha*' maonghemcha®”
hvarecha,® urvarahu“ paiti* baresman yahu,” mithrem“ vispanam®
dakhyundim’” danghu paitim® “yazamaide.*!

(13) Ahe® raya khvaranenghacha™ tem* yazai*° surunvata*’ yasna™
mithrem® vouru-gaoyaotim.” zaothrabyo*' mithrem®  vouru-
gaoyaoitim®™ yazamaide,“ rama-shayanem® hushayanem® airyabyo”
danghubyo.®

(11) We worship'® Meher yazata'* of advanced countries;'* we worship'’®

Meher yazata'’ of countries in the interior,'* pertaining to the neighbouring
country”! (or pertaining to this country”'); we worship? Meher yazata”’ per-

db For the translation of paragraphs 6-9, see Khorshed Nyayesh, above.

de i.e. for the worship, etc. of Meher Yazata of wide pastures, thousand ears, and ten thousand
eyes, of the spoken name and of Ram Khvastar (see Khorshed Nyayesh, above).

dd For its translation, see Khorshed Nyayesh, page 30.

de The portion from “Mithremaiwi-dakhyum yazamaide” up to here occurs in Meher yasht,
paras 144-145.


--- Page 47 ---

MEHER NYAYESH 31

taining to upper country,” and the lower or nether country.?” We worship*!
Meher yazata”’ pertaining to the country round about,*° and also the country
in the rear.*? (12) We praise*® Meher yazata** (and) Ahura*® (i.e. Ahura
Mazda) (who are) the exalted,*’ imperishable** and righteous.*° We praise”!
the stars,*! the Moon” and the Sun® and the lord*° of all** countries,” Meher
yazata.*” This we worship in front* “of the trees pertaining to the
Baresma.** (13) On account of his splendour?’ and glory™ I worship” that*
Meher Yazata® of wide pastures® with the audible*’ (or famous) yasna.°* We
worship“ Meher yazata” of wide pastures, “Shappy® and good dwelling®
for the Iranian®’ countries, with libations.”!

(14) Acha no! jamyat? avanghe,’ acha nd‘ jamyat® ravanghe,® acha
no’ jamyat® rafnanghe,’ acha nod’? jamyat'" marzdikai,” acha no”
jamyat'* baéshazai,'5 acha no'® jamyat’ verethraghnai'’® acha no”
jamyat” havanghai,”’ acha nd” jamyat® ‘““ashavastai,4 ughrd,”
aiwithird,** yasnyd?’? vahmyod,” an-aiwi-drukhtd” vispemai*’ anguhe*!
astvaite,” mithro*’ yo** vouru**-gaoyaoitish;*

(15) Tem?’ amavantem*® yazatem” siirem* damoéhu*' sevishtem”
mithrem® yazai zaothrabyo;* tem* pairi-jasai” vantacha®
nemanghacha;” tem* yazais' surunvata” yasna* mithrem™ vouru-
gaoyaoitim;* zaothraby6* mithrem®” vouru-gaoyaoitim™ yazamaide.”

(14) And may” Meher yazata*? who* (is) the lord of wide pastures,** the
mighty,”> triumphant,”° worthy of worship,”’ adoration,” the undeceived one”
in the entire*’ material*? world,*! come? to our! help!? May he “come’ for our*
affluence!® And may he come® for our’ joy!? May he come"' for our'® mercy”
and health!'* May he come”’ for our’® victory!'* And may he come” for the
prosperity”! of our! “family!?' It would be better if he comes” for our”
*“sanctification!™ (15) I worship** with oblations* that?” powerful** (and)
strong” Meher® yazata* (who is) most beneficent*? amongst (all the)
creatures.*' Him“ will I approach*’ with love* and homage.” I worship*!
Meher yazata™ of wide pastures* with the celebrated® (or famous”) yasna.™
We worship” Meher yazata of wide pastures** with libations.*°

df i.e. where the trees of Baresma grow. Its significance is that we revere Meher yazata whose
authority and chieftainship is predominant in this, (i.e. Iran) and other surrounding countries. If
the meaning of Meher as stated in the beginning of this Nyayesh be taken as “light”, the signi-
ficance of this para would be: “We praise the light of the Sun which is pervading in all the coun-
tries”.

dg Or of a happy dwelling or a good dwelling to the Iranian countries.

dh Dr. Geldner takes from the beginning of para 14 up to the world, “Ashavastai” as a poem of
eight lines; each line begins with “Acha no”.

di May he come for wiping out (our sins) (Prof. Harlez).
dj For the peace of our conscience (Professor Darmesteter).

dk i.e. for rendering us pure.


--- Page 48 ---

32 KHORDEH AVESTA

"“Haomayd gava_ baresmana, hizvé-danghangha, manthracha
vachacha-—_ shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha = arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vanghd, Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat
hacha, yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz-low tone) Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum,
mardum sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin
mazdayasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aedin bad. “"(To recite aloud).
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami, Mithrahe
Vouru-gaoyaditdish hazangra-gaoshahe, baévare-chashmand, aokhto-
namano yazatahe, Ramnascha khvastrahe. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

“Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan), namaz dadare gehan daman, Khshnaothra
Ahurahe Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat
vasna ferashotemem. Staomi Ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje khoreh awazayad Meher faragayod davare rast be-rasdad
amavand pirozgar amavandih pirozgarl. Dad din beh mazdayasnan,
agahi ravai goafrangani bad hafte kashvar zamin, d4ediin bad. Man 4no
awayad shudan, man 4no 4wayad shudan, Man ano awayad shudan.
Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite facing the south) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarthushti. Nemase te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Siira anahite.” Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nemo urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.
Mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitim yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 1. Meher
faragayod davare rast be-rasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

VISPA HUMATA

*PVispa' humata,” vispa hikhta,‘ vispa hvarshta,° baodhd-varshta ;7

=99

dl The portion from “Ahe raya khvarenanghacha” up to “Airyabyo danghubyo
curs in Meher yasht, paras 4-6.

in para 13 oc-

dm For the translation of this passage, see Khorshed Nyayesh, above.
dn For the translation of this section, see Khorshed Nyayesh, above.
do For the translation of this section, see Khorshed Nyayesh, above.

dp Although this prayer is recited only during the Havan Gah, there is no objection if it is
recited in any other Gahs.


--- Page 49 ---

VISPA HUMATA 33

vispa® dushmata,’ vispa duzhikhta," vispa’ duzhvarshta,'? noit'4
baodho-varshta.'* Vispa’® humata,!’ vispa'* hikhta,’’ vispa”’ hvarshta?!
vahishtem anghuim” ashaéta.”> Vispa*4 dushmata,”* vispa”* dizhukhta,””
vispa** duzhvarshta,” achishtem anghuim*® ashaéta.*! Vispanamcha”
humatanam® hukhtanaim™ hvarshtanam* vahishta anghui;** Aat*’
hacha* chithrem*’ashaone.” Ashem Vohii 1. (To recite three times).

All' good thoughts,” good words‘ (and) good deeds,° (are) produced with
(good) intelligence.’ All® evil thoughts,’ evil words!'! (and) evil deeds" (are)
not'* “produced with good intelligence.'5 All'® good thoughts,'” good words!”
(and) good deeds”' lead*? (the doer) to heaven.” All”? evil thoughts,™ evil
words”® (and) evil deeds”* “lead! (him) to hell.*° (The result) of all*? good
thoughts** goods words* (and) good deeds** (is) heaven.** Thus’ (it is)
manifest*’ to the righteous (person).”°

Explanation: (The purport is that virtuous and benevolent deeds are
orginated by men of good intelligence, but a man of wicked intelligence
performs wicked deeds. The end of a good, virtuous and religious man is
good. To such a person, during his own life-time as well as at the time of
death, there arises a great satisfaction that he spent his life in causing
prosperity to the world, in doing good to his own companions and, in
rendering help to the poor and needy persons. On the other hand, he who
commits sinful, immoral deeds suffers the punsihment of hell, (see my Yasht
Ba Maeni, fargard II and III of Hadokht Nask).

DOA NAM SETAYESHNE
4K hshnaothra! Ahurahe Mazdiao.? Ashem Vohii 1.

Ba name® yazade* bakhshayendehe* bakhshayeshgare®’ meherban.’
Nam setaeshne® Ahura Mazda,’ hamabiid’ hamahast" o hamabed.”
Name’? yazade'* Spena-Mino* andarach'’® minoan'”? min6.'* Azash”
khudash” yak nam”! Ahuramazdach.” Khodae* mehest,“ 0 tavana?> o
dana” o dadar,” o parvartar? 0 pana”? o khvavar,° o kerfehgar*! o
avakshidar” avizeh® veh dadastani™* hama-zor.**

(May there be) gratification' of (the creator) Hormazd!* (I begin this
prayer) in the name? of God* (Who is) bestower of good things,° forgiver of
sins°and merciful’ (I sing) and praise His name’, Hormazd’ (Ahura Mazda),

dq Original meaning is, “done with knowledge or intelligence” root ash= ar = Sanskrit aj = to
lead; or alternatively: good deeds obtain heaven (root Sanskrit ash = to obtain, to get).

dr Never abstain ye from three best things which are well-considered thought, well-spoken word
and well-done deed, (i.e. ye acquire them). Abstain ye from three worst things (which are) evil-
thoughts, evil-words and evil-deeds )i.e. do not acquire them). (See Vendidad fargard 18, paras
17 and 25).

ds The entire prayer of this Nam Setayeshne is in Pazend language. This Doa in the original
Pahlavi language is found in the Pahlavi Text known as Dinkard.


--- Page 50 ---

34 KHORDEH AVESTA

(who) always was", is'! (and) will be.'? (Whose) name’ (is) God," the
Beneficent Spirit;'° (and) who (is) the Spirit'® amongst’® the Spiritual ones!’.
His’? Own” one (special) name”! (is) Hormazd”. That Lord”? (is) the
greatest™, powerful*’, wise*®, creator’’, nourisher*’, protector”, care-taker*®,
virtuous", forgiver of sins*’, dispenser of justice and all powerful*.

Sepas! oe buzorg? hastian,? ke‘ afrid’ “avanid,° o pa khesh’
angambati® zor’ danai,'’ avartar' shash’? ameshaspandan,’ avad"
vesh!> yazdan,'* “roshan'’ behesht!® garothman,’? o gerd asman,” o
khur”! tava” o mah? bami,* o satare* vash-tokhm,” o bad,?’ o
andarvae,” o Av,” o atash,*° o zamin*! o orvar,” o gospand* o
ayokhshast,*4 “Yo mardum.**

(I offer) thanks! to that Exalted (Lord)? (amongst the existing ones*) who*
is the Creator® (of the entire creation) (and) is the designer of its end;°(and)
who* with his own self-hood,® strength? and wisdom! created* most
sublime’ six’? Ameshaspand,'? many! exalted’* yazatas,'® the bright!’
Heaven,'® Garothman,'’? the revolution of the sky,°the shining” Sun,”! the
brilliant’ Moon,” Stars> of many kinds,” the winds,”’ atmosphere,** water,”
fire, the earth,*! trees,” beneficent cattle,** the metals** and mankind.*

Yazishne' 0 niaeshne” az oe Khodae Kerfehgar* ke* meh* kard® az’
har® getiha? desheshnan’ mardum" pa gavaesh,’” madan™ dad o
sheheriareshe’’ angam'® raenidaresh’’ daman,'* pa _ rakhma”
angezashne”’ parhez”! dévan.”

I worship’ and pay homage’ to that virtuous Lord? who* made® mankind"
the greatest’ among’ all® worldly° creatures’® through the faculty of thinking”
and (by bestowing) intellect'? for combating’ the ““demons” (or wicked
lust), for opposing” them (and even) abstaining away (from them).

Namaz' oe vispa-agah’? ash’? khvavar,' kesh‘ farestid® pa’ Zartosht®
Spetaman’ asho' farohar," ashtash’ oe daman'’ din-daneshne™
varoeshne,'*> asne-kheradi’® goshosriteh-kheradi.'’ Danaesh'® o
raenidaresh,” vispa”’ hastan”' 0 bidan” o bedan,” farhangan farhang”4
manthra?> Spenta, ku?’ bed?* ravan” hu-pul*’ bokhtaresh,*' az
dozakhv*, vadardar® oe* ane* pehelum*® akhvan*’ ashoan,* roshan?

dt i.e. most invisible - that can never be seen by anyone. There is no word avanid in the Pahlavi
Nam Setayeshne found in Dinkard. Instead of avanid, va dad (meaning, and gave) is found in
the Nam Setayeshne, in the prayer book of the Kadimi Sect. Having derived the word avanid
from a = a, i.e. to, towards and root van = to vanquish and applied to Hormazd, it can mean
“destroyer”, “bringer of the end”.

699
(0)

du In this para after “roshan behesht garothman” every word has and its meaning is “and, as
well as”. According to the rule of the Gujarati language, I have not inserted “and” after every
word, but I have inserted “‘and” before the last word (men).

dv Originally this word is in the imperfect tense.

dw The Word “Dev” has been explained earlier.


--- Page 51 ---

DOA NAM SETAYESHNE 35

hand“ hu-boe*! hama-nekash.””

(With a bow I pay) homage’ unto that? Omniscient? and Compassionate
Lord,* who* through’ Spitaman’ Zartosht* of holy’? Fravashi,'’ sent® the
trustworthy’* knowledge of the Religion’ for the people of the world’? with a
view to attracting friendship’ (towards Himself), (which can be acquired) by
means of innate wisdom, and wisdom acquired through the ears (i.e. learnt).
For the knowledge'® and guidance” of all” persons who are,”! were,”? and
will be,?? (He) sent® the Science of Sciences™* (which is the beneficent”
Manthra;* which?’ (manthra) is” the ennobler of the soul”? helping to cross
the “Chinvat Bridge with ease, the deliverer*' from hell*? (and) the
indicator of the way*? towards the Best** abode*’ (i.e. Heaven) of the
righteous,** the bright,*? sweet-smelling*! and all-good.”

Pa! farmane’? to” khvavar,’ pa‘ farmane to* khvavar° pa’ farmane to®
khvavar,? padiram’ o minam"™ o goyam” o varzam' din avizeh,'
astuan hom" pa har kerfeh,"’ awakhsh"* az” vispa”’ bazeh.”! Avizeh dar
hom” khudash” asnideh-kunashne,* parhezashne,* 0 pak?® shash?’
zorane’® jan,” manashne* gavashne*! kunashne” o vir® o hosh* o
kherad.*

O! Merciful and Compassionate Lord!® O! Lord, Forgiver of sins!? I
accept,’° think’! (i.e. remember every moment), speak’? (i.e. teach others by
proclaiming) and practice!’ the pure’> religion’® (of Zartosht sent by you) in
accordance with’ Your Command,’ Order* and bidding.* I am steadfast'®
upon performing every meritorious deed’ and I return having repented’®
from’? all’? sinful acts.) I keep pure* my personal conduct,™ having
abstained” (from wicked lusts) the six?’ powers” of (my) soul”? (which are)
the power of thought,*® the power of speech,*’ the power of action,” the
power of logic*® (discriminating good and evil),* intelligence and
wisdom.*°

Pa kame to! kerfehgar’ tavanam kard? ane to parastashne,‘ pa* beh-
manashne,° beh-gavashne,’ beh-varzashne,® vashaiem’ rahe!’ roshan,"!
ke” om na-rasad'* geran' pazd'* dozakh,'* vadiram" pa cheshandarg,"®
rasam” ane behesht” pur-boe”' harvesp-pesideh” hama-khvaresh.”

O Virtuous One!? According to Thy will'l can perform? Thy worship*
with good thoughts,® good words’ and good deeds.* (And for the sake of my
own soul) I keep open’ the brilliant!’ (righteous) path!® (i.e. the path of
gaining Heaven) so that!* (after my death) the grievous’* punishment!> of
hell'® may not befall upon my (soul).'’ I shall pass over!’ the Chinvat
Bridge’® and attain the Paradise*® full of fragrance,*! all-adorned” and all-
comfortable.”

dx For the explanation, see note on the words “Sedosh getofarid” given under the meanings in
Patet Pashemani, Karda 12.


--- Page 52 ---

36 KHORDEH AVESTA

Setaeshne' oe avakhshidar’? khodae,’ ku‘ kameh kerfeh* padaeshne
kunand® farman-raenidaran,’ avdum*® buzed® darvandanach’ az
dozakh," 0” avizeha’ vinared" vispa.'S

(I sing the hymn of) praise! of that Lord,’ the Forgiver of Sins,? who*
bestows® rewards for meritorious deeds,° on those who obey (His)
Commands’ with the will to perform meritorious deeds;* and at last® (i.e.
after the period of Resurrection) will liberate’ the sinners'® from hell,"’ and’?
will embellish'* the entire “(world)'* with purity."°

Setaeshne' dadar Ahuramazda,’ harvesp-agah,’ tavana‘* o tavangar,°
haft Ameshaspand® Bahram yazad’ pirozgar® dushman-zadar,’ amahe"
hutashtahe" be-rasad.'? Ashem Vohi 1. (To recite three times).”

(I offer) praise! unto the Creator Hormazd,’? the Omniscient? (and)
Omnipotent,’ unto the “seven powerful’ Amshspands,° unto Behram yazad,’
the victorious® (and) the vanquisher of foes,’ (and) unto the well-fashioned"
(shaped) (yazad) Ama.'° (May all of them) come”’ (to my help)!

HOMAGE FOR THE FOUR DIRECTIONS

(Note: to be recited during the day after reciting the Doa Nam
Setayeshne)

Az hama gunah patet pashem4anum; Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem0! dongham? asanghamcha,’ shoithranamcha,’ gaoyaoitinamcha‘
maéthananamcha,® avo-khvarenanamcha,’ apamcha,®’ zemamcha,?
urvaranamcha,” anghaoscha"! zem6,” avanghecha"® ashno"™ vatahecha’®
ashaon6” stram,'’ maonghd"® hiro,’ anaghranim” raochangham”!
khvadhatanam,” vispanamcha” spentahe* mainyéush™ damanam,”*
ashaonam” ashaoninamcha”’ ashahe”* rathwam.” Ashem Vohi 1.

(Note: To be recited each time, turning to each direction.)

Ahmai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Salutation’ (be) unto (all) these? places,’ the cities,* pasture-lands°
dwelling abodes,° unto the fountains of (drinking) water’; the (displaced)
*-waters,® the lands’ unto the trees,'° this'! earth’? and the yonder’? sky;'* unto
the holy'® wind,'* the stars,’ the Moon,'* the Sun,'’? unto the boundless”

am”

dy In the Pahlavi Nam Setayeshne there occurs the word “dam” for the word “world”.

dz The entire para from “Setaeshne Dadar Ahuramazda” up to “be-rasad” is not found in the
Pahlavi Nam Setayeshne, it appears to have been added subsequently.

ea It would be better if the text mentions “‘six”, because prior to it there comes Dadar Ahura
Mazda.

eb This entire Homage is taken from Yasna Ha I, para 16. Here, instead of the words, “Nivaéd-
hyemi hankarayemi”, the word “Nemo” occurs.


--- Page 53 ---

HOMAGE FOR THE FOUR DIRECTIONS 37

natural” lights,”! unto all’? the creations* of Spenta Mainyu,” the lords” of

holiness’, righteous men*® and righteous women.”’

MAH BOKHTAR NYAYESH

(Note: This Nyayesh should be recited every day if possible; it is
enjoined otherwise in the Persian Rivayets to recite it especially on three
days every month — the New Moon, Full Moon and the No Moon-Day (the
dark half of the month).

Pa name yazdan Ahuramazda Khod&e awazini gorje khoreh
awazayad. Mah Bokhtar Mah yazad be-rasad®. Az hamaé gunah patet
pashemaénum, az harvastin dushmata duzkukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa
geti manid oem goft, oem kard, oem jast, oem bin bid ested, az 4n
gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani ravani geti mindani, okhe
awakhsh pashem§an pa sé gavashni pa patet hom.

(1) (To recite bowing the head): Nem6! Ahurai Mazdai’?, nemo Ahurai
Mazdai, nem6 Ahurai Mazdai, nem6d? Ameshaéibyo Spentaeiby6,* nemo6*
maonghai® gaochithrai,’ nemod® paiti-ditai,? nemd!’ paiti-dite;!' nemo
Ahurai Mazdai, nemo Ameshaéibyd SpentaéibyO nem0d maonghai gao-
chithrai, nem6 paiti-ditai, nemO paiti-dite; nemo Ahurai Mazdai, nemo
AmeshatibyO SpentaéibyO, nemo maonghai gaochithrai, nemO paiti-
ditai, nem6 paiti-dite.

(1) Homage! (be)-unto (the Creator) Hormazd!* Homage* (be) unto
Ameshaspands!* having the seed of the cattle!’ Homage® (be) unto the visible
(or resplendent) side of the Moon (And)! homage’? (be) unto the visible (or
bright) “part!”

Explanation: (Its significance is that homage be unto both the sides of
the Moon, bright as well as the Dark.)

(2) Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, Tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi Ashem: Ashem
Vohii 3.

Fravarané mazdayasno Zarthushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaeshd (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Maonghahe gao-

ec i.e. unto waters of rivers, streams etc.

ed This entire Nyayesh occurs in the Mah yasht except the passage “dasta amem” occurring
after “Yasnemcha” at the end of this Nyayesh.

ee i.e. may mah yazata the purifier (or salvation-giver) come (to my help)! Bestower, distributor
(Professor Darmesteter)

ef “Hail to thee when we look at thee! Hail to thee when thou lookest at us” (Professor
Darmesteter). “When the moon is visible, homage be unto it, when one thinks of the moon,
homage be unto it” (Professor Harlez).


--- Page 54 ---

38 KHORDEH AVESTA

chithrahe, géushcha aévd-datayao, géushcha pouru-saredhayao,®
khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha,
Yatha Ahi vairyd zaota fra-me-mrite, atha ratush ashat-chit hacha fra
ashava vidhvao mraotu. (3) Nemd Ahurai Mazdai, nemo Ameshaéibyo
Spentaeibyd, nemd maonghai gao-chithrai, nemo paiti-ditai, nemO paiti-
dite.

(4) Kat? mao™ ukshyeiti,’* kat mao! nerefsaiti!? Pancha-dasa'®
mao” ukhshyeiti,” pancha-dasa*’ mao” nerefsaiti,~ yao" he*
ukshkyastato,*® tao?’ nerfsanstato* tao nerefsanstatd, yao*' he®
ukhshyAnstatas® chit.*4 K@> ya*° mao’ ukhshyeiti** nerfsaiti® “thwat.””

(4) For how many” (days) does the Moon! wax'*? For how many’
(days) does the moon'® wane'”? Reply:- for fifteen'* (days) does the Moon
wax”’, and fifteen”’ (days) does the Moon” wane.*? As long as™ (is) her’
waxing”®, so long” is her? waning”, the process is eternal.“

(Zarathushtra speaks to the Creator Ahura Mazda): Who* (else) (is there)
other than “Thee through whom’** the Moon*’ waxes** (or) wanes*”? (Reply:
- there is none).

(4) Maonghem! gao-chithrem? ashavanem’ ashahe‘* _ ratiim*
yazamaide.° Tat? maonghem® paiti-vaénem,’ tat'? maonghem" paiti-
visem,'’? raokhshnem’? maonghem™ aiwi-vaénem’ raokhshnem"®
maonghem"” aiwi-visem,'* hishtenti’? Ameshao Spenta” khvarend”!
darayeinti,~ hishtenti?? Ameshaio Spenta™* khvarend** bakhshenti,”°
zam”’ paiti?® Ahuradhatam.”

(5) We praise’ the Moon! that keeps the seed of kine or cattle,’ the
righteous’ and the Lord? of righteousness.* (When) I look at’ (that) Moon® of
the dark half’ “I accept!” it (that Moon!! of darkness),!° (when) I behold!> the
Moon of the bright half (that brilliant’? Moon)'* I accept it to (that brilliant’®
Moon)’ the Holy Immortals” then stand up’’ and behold” (its) glory;! (and)
they spread”® “(its) glory*> upon”® the earth?’ created by Ahura.”

(5) Aat yat! maonghahe raokhshni* tapayeiti‘ mishtiS’ urvaranam®
zairi-gaonanam’ zaramaém® paiti? zemadha'’’ uzukhshyeiti." Antare-
maonghaoscha,” perend-maonghaoscha,” vishaptathaoscha.“ Antare-

eg i.e. for the worship, etc., of the Moon that keeps the seed of kine or cattle, of the sole-created
Bull (i.e. of Gavyodad), of the Bull, and many other species (see Khorshed Nyayesh).

eh The same sentence occurs also in Yasna Ha 44 Stanza 3.

ei i.e. as long as the Moon waxes, so long does it wane.

ej Original meaning: from thee, than thee.

ek Perhaps the word “tat” may be the abbreviation of the word “temanghuhantem” the meaning
of which would be “pertaining to darkness”; besides tat = Sanskrit tad = for this, thus. Professor
Darmesteter did not translate the word tat”.

el For explanation, see Khorshed Nyayesh, page 34.


--- Page 55 ---

MAH BOKHTAR NYAYESH 39

maonghem'’ ashavanem'® ashahe'’ ratim'® yazamaide;’ perend-
maonghem” ashavanem”! ashahe” ratim” yazamaide;* vishap-tathem”
ashavanem” ashahe”’ ratim”® yazamaide.”

(6) When! the light® of the Moon’ shines*, the green-coloured’ plants®
grow’! on? the earth'® through the mist.° We praise’? the days after the new
moon” and the days after the full moon,.'* the destroyer (of the darkness) of
the night.'* °*"We praise’® the new moon.'*

We praise“ the full moon,” the righteous’! (and) the lord® of
righteousness.”! We praise”’ (the full moon), the destroyer (of the darkness)
of the night,” righteous’® and lord”* of righteousness.””

(5)  Yazai' maonghem’?  gao-chitrem’ baghem* raévantem,°
khvarenanghuhantem® afnanghuhantem  tafnanghuhantem,’  vare-
changhuhantem’? khshtavantem” ishtivantem,'' yaokhshtivantem,”
saokavantem," zairimyavantem,"“ vohvavantem,'* baghem"*
baéshazem.””

I Praise! Mah yazata* that keeps the seed of kine or cattle,? (who is) the
bestower* (or the ordainer*), radiant,> glorious,° possessed of “water,’
warmth,® “refulgent? help giving,'° bestowing riches,'' powerful,”
profitable,'? possessed of verdure,'’* giver of good things (or prosperity)’
(and) the healing “deity'®

(8) Ahe” raya'® khvarenanghacha,” tem” yazai”' surunvata” yasna”
maonghem™ gaochithrem.” zaothrabyo* maonghem?’ gao-chithrem”
ashavanem” ashahe” ratiim*! yazamaide.”

(8) For this’? splendour'* and glory,'? I worship?’ the resonant’ (or
excellent) yasna,”* that”? Mah yazata™ that keeps the seed of kine or cattle.*°
We praise” with libations”* the Moon”’ that keeps the seed of kine or cattle,”
the righteous” (who is) the lord?’ of righteousness.*°

Haomayd' gava_ baresmana, _hizvd-danghangha, manthracha,
vachacha, shyaothnacha, zaothrabysacha arshukhdhaétibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat ysene paiti vanghd,

Mazdao Ahur6o vaétha ashat hacha

Yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide
em The Full Moon is called “Vishaptatha”, i.e. destroyer of the darkness of night; the reason is
that on the Full Moon day there is no darkness at all the whole night; moreover, the word
“Vishaptatha” can also be explained in another way: vi = two; haptathe = relating to week; vi +

haptatha = vishaptatha = relating to two weeks, i.e. relating to a fortnight. The days of the
Moon” (Darmesteter).

en Bringing clouds of water, producer of clouds, laid with water.
eo Wisdom-giving (Darmesteter); (ever-) moving (Harlez)

ep Bagha (Sanskrit bhaga) means “Divine power”.


--- Page 56 ---

40 KHORDEH AVESTA

(To recite in baz) Ahura Mazda Khodae, awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama_ sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem _behedin
mazdayasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad. “‘Aediin bad. (To recite aloud)
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

(9) Yasnemcha vahmemcha = aojaseha zavarecha  4Afrinami,
maonghahe gao-chithrahe, géushcha aévd-datayao, géushcha pouru-
saredhayao. Ashem Vohii 3.

(10) “Dasta! amem? verethraghnemcha,’ dasta* géush> khvathro-
nahim,® dasta’ naram® pourutatem,’ stahyanam'’ vyakhnandam,"
vanatam” avanemnaniam”® hathravanatam!* hamerethe!5,
hathravanatam” dushmainyush,” steraptam' chithra’-avangham.”

(11) Yazata”' pouru-khvarenangha,” yazata* pouru-baeshaza,™
chithra* v6 buyadresh”” masando,* chithra” vo** zavandsavo*!
chithrem® boit** yizemchit™ khvarend,> yazemnai*® apd*’ dayata.*
Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmai raéshcha, Hazanghrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

(10-11) Ye yazatas”' full of glory!” Ye yazatas™ full of healing power!”
give' strength? and victory’? (unto me), “give*, increase® (herd) of cattle;°
give’ (me) “a multitude’ of strong!® men,* sitting in the assembly,"
vanquishing’* (wicked creation), unconquerable,’? vanquishing'* the
adversaries'> and enemies at-one-stroke,'* ever bestowing gladness** (and)
helping” openly.'? May the greatness*® be?’ manifest”> through you!*° May
the good derived by invocation*' be*” manifest”? through you**(or advantages
obtained through prayers).*!

(O yazatas!) give** ye** manifestly” the glory to him who consecrates*®
“the waters*’ (i.e. to him who realises the excellence of the waters).

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) nam4z dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, nemo Ahurai Mazdai, nemo Ameshatibyod Spentaéibyo, nemo
maonghai gao-chithrai, nem6 paiti-ditai, nem6 paiti-dite; Ashem Vohi 1.

eq For the translation, see Khorshed Nyayesh, above.

er Dr. Geldner takes entire paras 10-11 of “Dasta Amem” in verse form of 14 lines. Every line
stops at Coma (,) and full point (.) The entire portion occurs in Vishtasp yasht, paras 6-8.

es Give happiness of cattle and livelihood (Pahlavi): “give pompous beauty of cattle” (Harlez)
“Meat and bread for comfort” (Darmesteter)

et Its significance is, many sons, of Atash Nyayesh para 5.

eu If the word, “apo” is taken in the vocative plural instead of in the accusative plural, this sen-
tence can be translated as under:- O waters! give glory manifestly (and) indeed to the consecrat-
or.


--- Page 57 ---

MAH BOKHTAR NYAYESH 41

Gorje Khoreh awazayad Mah Bokhtar Mah yazad berasad amavand
pirozgar amavandih pirozgari. Dad din beh Mazdayasnan agahi ravai
goafrangani bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man ano awayad
shudan, man 4no 4wayad shudan, man 4no 4wayad shudan. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite facing the south) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarthushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Stra Anahite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem urvaire vanghuhi mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

Maonghem gao-chithrem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide.
Ashem Vohi 1.

Mah Bokhtar Mah yazad be-rasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

ARDVI SURA NYAYESH

(This should be recited everyday if possible, otherwise it is enjoined to be
recited on five days of every month, viz Asfandarmad, Avan, Din,
Ashisvangh and Marespand).

(1) Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao; Ashem Vohi 1. Pa name yazdan
Ahura Mazda Khodae awazinti, gorje khoreh awazayad; Avan Ardvi
Sir Banu be-rasad.”

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, men pa geti manid, oem goft oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni tani
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pashem4n pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazd4o, tardidite anghrahe mainyéush;
haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi Ashem; Ashem
Vohi 3. Fravarané mazdayasnOd Zarathushtrish vidaévd Ahura-tkaésh6
(Gah according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha.

Apam vanghuhinadm mazdadhatanam, areduyao 4po anahitayao
ashaonyao, vispanamcha apam mazdadhatanam,  vispanamcha
urvanranam “Mazdadhatanam, khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota fra-me mrite,
atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti. Yatha Ahi
Vairyo 10.

2) Mraot' Ahurd Mazdao’ Spitamai’ Zarathushtrai,* yazaésha*> me
Pp

ev i.e. may Ardvi Sura Banu come (to my help).

ew i.e. for the worship, etc., of the good waters created by Mazda (of the undefiled and right-
eous water of Ardvi Sura), of all waters created by Mazda (and) of all plants created by Mazda,
(see Khorshed Nyayesh, above).


--- Page 58 ---

42 KHORDEH AVESTA

him,’ Spitama*® Zarathushtra,? yim’ Aredvim Siram"™ anahitam”
’ » y

“perethi-frakam’ baéshazyam, vidaévam' ahur6-tkaesham,'°
yesnyam"’ anghuhe® astvaite, vahmyam” anghuhe”! astvaite.” Adhi-
fradhanam* ashonim,* vanthvo-fradhanim* ashaonim,” gaétho-
fradhanam”’ ashaonim” shaétd-fradhanam” ashaonim,” danghu-
fradhanaim*! ashaonim.”

(2) (The Creator) Ahura Mazda’ spoke! unto *’Spitaman* Zartosht*:

O Spitaman* Zartosht!? Mayest thou praise’ her? who’? is My® Ardvi
Sura!' the undefiled,'? wide-flowing,'’ health-giving’* (River), opposed’> to
the “Demons; “acting!® according to the Law of Ahura Mazda, worthy of
worship’’ for the people’® of the material'? world, worthy of prayer’’ for the
people”! of the corporeal” world, life (or vivacity) increasing,” righteous,“
®herd-increasing,*> righteous, “rendering the world prosperous,’ holy,”®
wealth-increasing,” and rendering the countries prosperous,” the righteous”
(Ardvi Sura of these characteristics).

Explanation:- Ardvi Sura is the name of the river flowing from certain
quarters of the provinces of Ancient Iran. This river was longer and broader
than all other rivers known at that period. It is compared with the River Amu
or the Oxus. The source of the present Oxus River is from the Pamir
mountains. The Mount Hukairya is known as the source of Ardvi Sura. This
river was not only praised in the whole of Iran from very ancient times, but
was well known in certain parts of Europe and many other places. In later
times it was recognised widely, and the angel Anahita presided over it. As
mentioned in the Seventh fargard of the Vendidad, its original name is
“Ardvi”. The description of this river, as seen in the Pahlavi Books is derived
from the Ardvi Sura (or Avan) Yasht. According to the description in the
Pahlavi Book called Dadistan i Denik, this Ardvi Sura River, where the tree
called, “Harvisp-Tokhmi” is situated, and where all kinds of trees and
various medicinal plants are found, mingled with the source of the trees
mentioned above and, with the fallen branches etc., spreads her water to all
other places. On account of this, too, the water of this river is considered

ex Dr. Geldner takes the portion from perethu-frakam up to end of the paragraph - (ashaonim) in
verse form of nine lines: every line has comma (,) and ends with a full-stop (.).

ey “Spitama” was the illustrious name of the ancestor of the ninth generation of the Prophet Za -
rathushtra. From this, Holy Zarathushtra is known as pertaining to the family of Spitama or
Spitaman Zartosht. For further explanation concering this, see Zartosht-Nama by Sheth
Kharshedji Rustamji Cama, Chapter 2.

ez i.e. removing impurity and plague, (see notes on Srosh Baj).
fa i.e. fulfilling that which is God’s desire for keeping the world pure.
fb increasing the herd of cattle ( Prof. Darmesteter and Harlez)

fc increasing the herd of sheep (Prof. Darmesteter).


--- Page 59 ---

ARDVI SURA NYAYESH 43

healthy and healing and superior to all other waters”. At present our people
generally regard the water of all rivers and seas as “Ardvi Sura” or, “Avan
Ardvi Sura”).

(3) Ya! vispanam? arshnim’? Khshudrao* yaozdadhaiti6 Ya°
vispanam hairishinam® zanthai garewan'’ yaozdadhiaiti."’ Ya’ vispao™
hairishish'* huzamito' dadhiiti.'* Ya!’ vispanam® hairishinam” daitim”
rathwim”! paéma” ava-baraiti.”

(3) (Ardvi Sura) who purifies* the seed? of all’ males,> who® (Ardvi Sura)
purifies’! the wombs”’ of all’ pregnant mothers® for giving birth’ (Ardvi Sura)
grants'® easy childbirth’ to all’? females'*, (and) who'’ (Ardvi Sura) bestows
upon” all'* females’ proper” (and) timely”! milk.”

Explanation:- (in this paragraph some excellent properties of the water
of Ardvi Sura are mentioned). Its original significance is, that in the waters
of this river there was the quality of purifying the blood, and of giving
strength to the body, like a tonic, for digesting the food easily. For older
people fresh air and pure water are very important, to obtain sound health
and good digestion.

(3) Masitam'! dirat? frasritam;? ya‘ asti> avavaiti® mas0o’, yatha®
vispao° imao'™ apo" yao’ zema"™ paiti'* fratachanti;'> ya'® amavaiti’
fratachaiti,’® hukairyat’” hacha” bareanghat,”’ avi? zrayd*> vouru-
kashem.”

(4) (I praise Ardvi Sura) famed? in distant (countries),? which‘ (alone) is®
as great’ as all’ the other’ rivers"! that’? flow! on'* (this) earth.'? Who,’° (the
great!” River) flows forth'® (originating) from? the Mount?! *Hukairya” to”
the Sea” "Vouru-kasha.™

(5) Yaozenti! vispe? karan? zraya‘ Vouru-kashaya> 4,° vispo’
maidhy6d® yaozaiti.’ Yat hish avi’ fratachaiti'! yat hish avi’? frazgaraiti,'
Aredvi Siira' Andhita.5 Yenghe' hazangrem,'’’  vairyanam,'®
hazangrem’” apaghzaranam.” Kaschitcha”! aésham” vairyanam,”™
kaschitcha*” aésham* apaghzaranam,’ chathwaresatem”’ ayare-
baranam*hvaspai” naire” baremnai.*!

(5) AlP the ®shores? (of these rivers) unite! with® the Sea* Vouru-kasha*
(and) every’ (river) unites’ with the middle part* (of that sea). To whatever
parts'* the undefiled'> Ardvi Sura'* (River) flows! she renders''! those parts!”

fd See Ardvi Sura yasht Ba Maheni, by Ervad T. D. Anklesaria.
fe In the Karda 23 of Meher Yasht this mount is called the highest summit of Albourz.

ff ““Vouru-Kasha” whose original meaning is (the sea) with wide-shores, was called the sea situ-
ated in the southern direction of Iran. In Pahlavi it is known by the name “Frakhant”. This sea
has been compared with the modern “Caspian Sea”. See my Avesta dictionary, p. 509

fg All the sources (of these rivers) (prof. Harlez)


--- Page 60 ---

44 KHORDEH AVESTA

prosperous.'’ To whom!® (belong) a thousand” (rivers) amongst the rivers'*
(and) a thousand’® (outlets) amongst the outlets.”” (For crossing) any”’ of
these” rivers’’ (or) any~* of these” outlets”* of forty’? days ride** mounted?!
on a swift horse”’ is required for a man.*”

(6) Anghaoscha! me? aévanghao’ apo‘ apaghzaro° vijasaiti,® vispaish’
avi® karshvan’ yaish’® hapta."' Anghaoscha” me™ aévanghao™ apo
hamatha" avabaraiti’’ haminemcha'™ zayanemcha.” Ha” me”! apo”
yaozdadhaiti,> ha arshnam™ khshudrao,* ha khshathrinam”
garewan,” ha” khshathrinam” paéma.”

(6) (The Creator Ahura Mazda says):- every outlet* of this' River* of
Mine’ penetrates® unto® all’ the *seven!! regions.° (The water) of this!” one!4
River'> of Mine’ is uniformly’® sufficient in summer'® as well as winter.’
She”? (i.e. Ardvi Sura) purifies’? My! waters” (or rivers”), the seed” of
males,™ the wombs”’ of females”® (and) the milk°® of mothers.”®

(From here Ha or Chapter of “A Hatam” begins. If any person desires to
recite Ardvi Sura Nyayesh without the Ha of A Hatam, he should leave the
portion from here up to “ferashotemem” on page 69, line 16).

(6) A *hatamcha,' anghushamcha? zatandmacha? azatanamcha,!
ashaonam’ idha® jasentu’ fravashay6,* yoi’ hish'® bawrare" paityapem,'””
nazdishtayat'’ apat'4 hacha.'* (7) Ma'® no!” 4po'® dushmananghe,” ma”
no”! apo” duzvachanghe,*™ ma*4 n6d* apd** dushshyaothanai,”” ma”
duzdaénai,” ma*” hashi-tbishe,*! ma? moghu-tbishe,* ma* varezano6-
tbishe,*= ma* nafy6-tbishe.’ Madha* no” ahmi® fradhaiti*' apo”
vanghuhish,** vahishtao“ mazdadhatao* ashaonish,“© yd” no*®
airirichinam”® irirkshaiti® gaéthanam.*' Madha” no** ahmi™ fradhaiti™
apo vanghuhish® vahishtao* mazdadhatao” ashaonish,” yo no”
airirichinam® iririkhshaiti® tanunam.®

(8) YO tayush,” yo® hazangha,® yo” gadhd” yo” ashavaja,” yo”
yotumao,’” yd’ nasuspao,” yo” sperezvao,” yd* araitivao,®' yo”
ashemaogh6® an-ashava,* yo* mashyd* drvao*’ sasta;** tem*® avi”
tbaeshao”! paityantu” ithyejao” isha” yo i dadha,” ithyejao”’ yantu®
yo” di dadha.!°

(6) May the Fravashis® of the righteous (people)°, of those that are,’ that
have been,” and of those to be born hereafter*, come hither’ who’ have
made"! those (waters)'° from’ the nearest!’ river’* (of Ardvi Sura) flowing
Sforward.'? (7) (Let) not!® (these efficacious) waters!® of ours!’ (be) for a man

fh For the explanation of the words. “Hafte Keswar”, see notes on p.35.

fi This entire portion of “A hatamcha” is taken from Yasna Ha 65, paras 6-14. For further de-
tails, see my translation of Yazishna.

fj i.e. We revere the Fravashis of those virtuous persons who have developed canals for fertiliz-
ing the earth for agriculture.


--- Page 61 ---

ARDVI SURA NYAYESH 45

of wicked thoughts'®, wicked words” and wicked deeds! (Let) not** (these
efficacious) waters** of ours”® (be) for the man of wicked religion.” for the
tormentors of a friend,*' a priest*? and workmen!* (Let) not*® (the waters be)
for one who torments his own kindred!*” (Let) not®® our efficacious®
effective,** best pure** waters” created by Ahura Mazda* (be) profitable*! to
that (person),*° who*’ desires to empty out®® (destroy) our** abundant?
settlements.*' (Let) not our* efficacious,*’ best,** pure® waters*® created by
Ahura Mazda (be) beneficial®* to that (person)** who*! desires to “empty
out™ (harm) our” “healthy® bodies!® (8) (And all those) who® (are) thieves”
robbers,” murderers.” killers of righteous persons,” addicted to sorcery,’
buriers of dead bodies,” ™the wicked,” the niggards*' (or the greedy),”!
wicked™ heretics® (and) the evil,*’ tyrannical** persons® (may not get the
benefit of the efficacious waters of Ardvi Sura). May injuries*! come upon”
the” (persons) mentioned above) May “their evil desires lead them to
destruction.”

(9) Apo! gatava? ramdidhwem,? yavata‘ zaota’ yazaite.° Katha’ zaota®
khsata? vacha' Apo" vangushish’ yazaite.'’ Kuthra'* bavat' hito-
hizvao'’® yezi'’ an-arethe’® yazaite.’? Kuthra”® vach6"' avi-bita,” yan”
he™ chakhse* aéthra-paitish,”® kuthra”’ tao” frayo” bavan,” kuthra*!
tao” ishudd* bavan.*4 Kuthra®* tao ratayo*” bavan,* yan Ahuro
Mazdao* Zarathushtrai*! fravavacha,” fra Zarathushtrd* gaéthabyo”
astvaitibyo.“ (10) Avajastim*® paurvam* 4pd* jaidhydish®
Zarathushtra,” paschaéta™ aiwy6*! zaothrao™ frabardish* yaozdatao™
dahm6-pairish-tao,* iman** vacho*’ framri.* (11) Apo® yanem™ vo“
yasami* mazadontem™ tem“ me® dayata,® yenghe” daiti® paiti®
vangho” nisrita” an-aiwi-drukhti.” Apo” ishtim™ vo jaidhyami”
pouru-saredham” amavitim,” frazantimcha” khvaparam® yenghao*!
paourushcha® berejyan.*? Naéchishcha® anghao* yasaiti®’ jyanai*,
noit® snathai,” noit?' mahrkai” nodit™ aénanghe,™ ndit®* apayatée.”

(9) O (pure) waters!’ as long as* the priest’ invokes, praises® (so long as)
ye? rejoice in (your) place.? How’ shall the priest® consecrate’? (or praise)!?
the good’? waters''! with the word'® taught?’ If!’ (that officiating-priest)
consecrates’” (the waters) contrary to the prescribed rule,'* how’* will he be!®
(tongue-fettered)'® silenced? How”? will he apply” (those) words*! which”
the Herbad” taught*> him?’* How”’ might’ that’ prayer” (be fulfilled)?*° In-
what-way*! will that? gratefulness*® be accomplished?** How* will that*®
gift?’ (or offering)*” be** made? About whom* (the creator) Ahura Mazda*“°

fk i.e. a desire to see us in a weak and sickly condition (Harlez).
fl Original meaning “not empty”, i.e not weak or not distressed.
fm “Enemy” (Spiegel): “Jealous” (Darmesteter).

fn Spiegel and Justi, this man ; that person (Harlez). May destruction reach him who attempts to
destroy us (Darmesteter).


--- Page 62 ---

46 KHORDEH AVESTA

had spoken” to (the prophet) Zarathushtra,*’ (and in turn the Prophet)
Zarathushtra*’ proclaimed to the people*’ of the corporeal world?“ (10) O
Zarathushtra! Thou shouldst pray** (address) first*® the petition*® to the
waters;*’ thou shouldst then” carry* the libation® to those waters*' examined
by a pious™ and wise man.** (and) pronounce the words*’ (mentioned below).

(11) O ye waters! Ye® grant me® that™ great® favour,” I beseech” you.*!
Through the bestowal® of which®’ (favour) goodness” is produced” by
means of guilelessness.” O ye waters! I beseech you” for wealth” of many
kinds,” and large’ and self-supporting’ progeny.” On whom* plenty” of
children “plenty of blessings may spread. None, even®* amongst that
(family),*° will desire*’ to harm*® (others), to raise arms’ (against them), to
afflict” (them) or to wreak vengeance™ (and) to destory.”®

(12) Imat*” vos apo” jaidhyemi,'” imat' zem6,? imat urvarao, imat
Ameshaé Spenta® hukhshathra’ hudhaonghd,* vanghavascha’
vanguhischa” vohunam" dataro,” imat'? ashaunam'™ vanguhish’*
fravashayo" ughrao” aiwithirao,'* imat'’? Mithra”” Vouru-gaoyaoite,”'
imat” Sraosha® ashya™ huraodha” imat”’ Rashnavo”’ razishta,”* imat”?
Atare*” Mazdao*! puthra,? imat*? bereza*! Ahura,*> khshathraya*
apam*” napo* aurvat-aspa,” imat* vispe*! yazataonghd”  yoi*
vanghazdao“ ashavano.* (13) Imat* me“ 4p6* dayata,” imat* zem6,*!
imat® urvarao,* imat™ Amesha Spenta*® hukhshathra~ hudhaongho,”
vanghavascha* vanguhishcha”® vohunam™ datar6,°' imat? ashaonam®
vanguhish™ fravashayo® ughrao® aiwithirao,” imat® Mithra® Vouru-
gaoyaoite,” imat’! Sraosha” Ashya’ huraodha,” imat’ Rashnavo”
razishta,” imat’ Atare” Ahurahe Mazdao* puthra,®! imat® bereza®
Ahura* khshathraya® apam* napo*’ aurvat-aspa,* imat® vispe”
yazataongho”! yoi” vanghazdao” ashavano.” (14) Yatcha®> ahmat” asti’”
mazyo,” yatcha” ahmat'™ asti’! vanghd,'” yatcha' ahmat' asti!®
srayo,' yatcha'” ahmat'® asti!” pard-arejastarem;'” tat’ no!”
dayata'? yizem', yazata'® ashavano'' khshayamna!’  isana,''®
moshucha'” dsuyacha,’ hathra’' ana!” gathwya'?  vacha.'4
Haithyavarshtam' hyat'* vasna'”’ ferashotemem.'”

(Ha of A Hatamacha ends here).

(12) O waters!*’ I beseech'® of you®® this” (favour). O earth!? O plants!*
O Bountiful Immortals,° well-ruling,’ possessing good sense,® givers’ of
good things'' to good (men)’ and good (women)!'° O good,'* mighty’’ (and)
triumphant'* Fravashis'® of the righteous (persons)'*! O Meher” (yazata) of
the wide pastures!*' O beautiful, holy Srosh (Yazata)! O Rashna, the most
just! O Fire*® the purifier’? (of all things) relating to Ahura Mazda!*! O
imperial,*® swift-footed horse, exalted** Lord,*> Navel** of (centre) of the

fo i.e. that generation may perform patriotic and benevolent acts so that people will bless them
and their parents and guardians.


--- Page 63 ---

ARDVI SURA NYAYESH 47

waters!*” (and) O ye all*! holy* yazatas,” bestower of better gifts!“ (do I
beseech'® of you” this”’ (gift). (13) O ye waters! do you grant” me’ these*®
(riches and virtuous progeny). O earth!*! plants!°? O Bountiful Immortals,*°
well-ruling,® possessing good sense,*’ givers®' of good things” to good*®
(men) and (women)!*” O good,“ mighty® (and) triumphant®’ Fravashis® of
the righteous (persons)!® O Meher® (yazata) of wide pastures,”? O
beautiful,“ holy”? Srosh” (yazata)! O Rashna,” the most just!”’ O Fire,” the
purifier®' (of all things) relating to Ahura Mazda!*° O Royal,® swift-footed
horse,®* exalted® Lord,** Navel®’ (centre) of the Waters!®° And O ye all®°
holy™ yazatas,°! bestowers of better gifts!°? You grant me*’ these*® (riches and
virtuous progeny). (14) (O yazatas! Ye grant me that which” is’’ greater”
than this,”° and that which” is! better? than this,'° and that which? is’ more
beautiful® than this* and that which’ is’ more precious'® than this.’ O ye’*
ruling’? and with desires fulfilled,'* righteous'® yazatas!'> You grant'? unto
us’* (above mentioned) that (wish) quickly’? and swiftly” by means of these”
Gathic?? ?verses.** Whatever” is the wish?’ of the doers” of virtuous deeds is
much superior’® (to all other wishes)

(3) Yam! azem? yo? Ahurd Mazdao* huzvarena® uzbaire,° fradathai’
nmanahecha® visascha? zan-téushcha’ danghéushcha."'

(4) Ya”? ahmat’ staota yasnya™ sravayeni,'*> Ahunemcha Vairim'®
sravayeni'!’ Ashemcha Vahishtem'® husravani'’ apascha” vanguhish”!
yaozdathane;” hathra* ana* gathwya” vacha” gard-nmane”’ Ahurahe
Mazdao”* jasat” paoiry6.* Dathat*' ahmat™ tat avat® ayaptem.™

(7) P am Ahura Mazda,‘ who’ by the powerful “force,> produced® Ardvi
sura for the prosperity’ of the house,* clans,’ town'® and country.'' (8) (The
reciter speaks):- For whom (Ardvi Sura)'?'> (or inasmuch as!*!’) I shall
chant'S the "staota yasna'* and Ahunavar'® with good ‘intonation’ and I shall
chant!’ Asha Vahishta'® (i.e Ashem Vohii) and shall purify” the good?!
waters.”” By means of (reciting)”* these** (above-mentioned) Gathic” verse,”°
(the reciter) first*® attains’? the Garothman’’ (Paradise) of the (the Creator)
Ahura Mazda. On account of this* (i.e. on account of reciting the sacred
verse, the Creator Ahura Mazda) gave?! him this** benefit* (to the reciter).

Explanation:- (Some reference to which benefits are accrued by reciting

fp i.e. by means of hearing Gathic verses chanted by us.

fq If we take the reading, “hizvarena” according to Dr. Geldner, the word means, “with the
movement of the tongue”, i.e. with the strength of the tongue, derived form “hizva”, tongue and
“arena”, motion, movement.

fr Staota yasnya - is the Avestan name of one of the 21 Nasks of our Holy religion. In Pahlavi it
is called ““Satud yasht’”. Its praise is mentioned in Yazishna ha 71. The literal meaning of “Staota
yasnya”’ is “‘praise-worthy of Yazishna’”. Generally this name is applied to the Has (or Chapters)
of the Five Gathas and Seven Has (or Chapters) of the Yasna Haptanghaiti.

fs Original meaning, “in good intonation,” (locative singular of husravan.)


--- Page 64 ---

48 KHORDEH AVESTA

with understanding, clearly and with good intonation the sacred verses of
Yatha, Ashem and “Staota yasnya’”, and by acting according to them, is seen
from this para.)

(9) Ahe! raya? khvarenanghacha,’> tam‘ yazai> surunvata® yasna,’
tam® yazai’ hu-yashta” yasna." Ana” buydo' zavan6-sasta, ana!®
y y y y
buyao’ huyashtara.!” Aredvim Siram'™® Andahitam’ ashaonim;”’
y y
zaothrabyo”' Aredvim Siram” Anahitam” ashaonim™ ashahe”* ratiim”®
yazamaide.””

(9) On account of the radiance? and glory* of that (Ardvi Sura’) I praise
her* with the famous® yasna; through this’? (i.e with sincere heart) (0
undefiled Ardvi Sura!) Mayest thou “be? pleased or honoured with my!
invocation,'* mayest thou be’® most fully worshipped’’ (i.e pleased)! (I
praise) the undefiled’? (and) the righteous”? Ardvi Sura.'* We remember?’ or
revere”’ with libations”! the undefiled* (and) the righteous“ Ardvi Sura
(who) (is) the Lord of righteousness.

Haomayd gava baresmana hizvo-danghangha, manthracha vachacha
shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha, arshukhdhatibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
Yaonghamacha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae, awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama_ sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem _behedin
mazdayasnan agahi astvani neki rasanad aedin bad. (To recite aloud)
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

(10) Yasnemacha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha 4frinami, apam
vanguhinam mazdadhatanam, Areduyao Apo Anahitayao ashaonyao,
vispanamcha apam mazdadhatanam, vispanamcha’~ urvaranam
mazdadhatanam. Ashem Vohii 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan), mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan), namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite anghrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi Ashem, Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje khoreh awzayad Avan Ardvi Sir Banu berasad amavand
pirozgar amavandi pirozgari. Dad Din beh Mazdayasnan, agahi ravai
goafarangani bad hafte keshvar zamin, aediin bad. Man 4no 4wayad
shudan, man 4no 4wayad shudan, man 4no 4wayad shudan. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

ft i.e. mayest thou be full of love unto me through this invocation of mine.


--- Page 65 ---

ARDVI SURA NYAYESH 49

(Recite facing the south) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarthushti. Nemasete ashaum sévishte Aredvi Siira Anadhite Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nemo urvaire vanguhi mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

Aredvim Siram Anahitam, ashaonim ashahe ratiim yazamaide.
Ashem Vohi h

Avan Ardvi Sur Banu be-rasad Ashem Vohi 1.

ATASH NYAYESH

(This Nyayesh should be recited every day, if possible; it is enjoined
otherwise in the Persian Rivayets to recite it specially on five days every
month — Hormazd, Ardibehesht, Adar, Srosh and Beheram).

Khshnaothra! Ahurahe Mazdao.”

(To recite bowing the head): Nemase’-te,* Atarsh> Mazdao Ahurahe®
hudhao’ mazishta® yazata’. Ashem Vohi 1.

(May there be) the propitiation or pleasure of Ahura Mazda!

Homage (be) unto thee, O Fire’ of Hormazd,° bestowing good’ (or
beneficent),’ the Greatest Yazata!

Pa name! yazdan* Ahura Mazda’? Khodae‘* awazin? gorje® khoreh’
awazayad.®

(To recite as follows before Atash Behram)

Atash ° Beheram " Adar" fara.”

(I begin to recite this) in the name! of God,” Creator Hormazd? (and) the
Lord‘ (of the entire world) (and ) beneficent. May the lustre® and glory’ of
Atash? (angel of Fire)’ Behram,'° the exalted’? Fire? increase!®

(To recite as under before Atash Adaran)
Atash® Adaran" Adar’ fara."

May the lustre® and glory’ of Atash'? Adaran," the great'® Fire,’ increase!
Y glory g

(To recite as under before the fire in the house)
Atash "7 dadgah'® Adar” fara.”
May the lustre® and glory’ of atash'’? Dadgah,'* the great” Fire’’ increase!®

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman pa se gavashni pa patet


--- Page 66 ---

50 KHORDEH AVESTA

hom.

™Us-mdi'* uzareshva!? Ahura”
Armaiti?! tevishim”? dasva”
Spenishta** Mainyu?> Mazda,”
Vanghuya’”’ zavo”* ada,”
Asha” hazo*! émavat?
Vohi** Manangha*™ feseratim.*

O Ahura Mazda, the most beneficent spirit and the “bestower of good
things”’ in return”? for prayers!”* Do Thou “purify? me!” (i.e keep me away
from wicked deeds), owing to (my) gentleness (or humility)?’ do Thou
grant™ me'® strength,’on account of righteousness*” bestow upon” (me)
mighty power*! (and) on account of (my) good thoughts grant’? me’®
®supremacy.*°

Rafedhrai** vouruchashane,””
doishi**-moi* ya” ve"! abifra,”
ta * khshathrahya* Ahura*
ya’ vanghéush” ashish*® manangho;”
frd Spenta® Armaite™
Asha daénao® fradakhshaya.™

O Hormazd!** for (my) delight** (and) for sufficiently “acquiring
religious lore,” do Thou “grant me assuredly those*® gifts*® which* (are)
blessed by Shehrevar** and Vohuman.*”” O Spenta Armaiti!*’*’ instruct™
(me) the Commandments of the Religion® through Asha.”

At ratam® Zarathushtro*
tanvaschit*’ khvakhyao* ushtanem”
dadaiti,” paurvatatem™
mananghascha® vanghéush® Mazdai,™
shyaothanahya® ashai® yacha”
ukhdhakhyacha® seroshem® khshathremcha.”

A”?

fu The portion from “Us-m6i uzareshva” to “Seraoshem Khshathremcha” is taken from Yasna
Ha 33 called “Yatha dish”, stanzas 12-14. For the explanation of the words contained in the
stanza, see my Gatha Ba Maeni.

fv Originally bestower of reward of prayers in good things: Zava=Sanskrit hava= prayer,
invocation, supplication”.

fw “Uzareshva” imperative second person singular Atmanepada: root uz-arez = Sanskrit Arz =
to purify, to render white; Arise for me” i.e. “help me” (Spiegel, Harlez and Mills): “deliver me
from” (Darmesteter) based on Pahlavi version.

fx Original meaning “‘chieftainship over cattle”, see Yasna 51,4.

fy Original meaning for “tasting widely”, dative singular of vouru-chashan; root chash = Persian
chashidan = to taste or Sanskrit chakhsh = to see, to examine.

fz Reverend Mills; blessing (see Yasna IX 3, 6, 9, 12); ashish (in the sense of ashish) noun, fem-
inine gender, accusative plural. Sanskrit ashis.


--- Page 67 ---

ATASH NYAYESH 51

(Holy) Zarathushtra*® dedicates as an offering**® even the life® of his

own™ body*’ and the excellence® (or pre-eminence®') of good mind unto
Ahura Mazda.“ The prophet dedicates as an offering the power” of (his
own) deed® and obedience” of word® unto Asha.

Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. (To recite bowing the head) Nemase-
te Atarsh Mazdao Ahurahe hudhao mazishta yazata. Ashem Vohi 3.
Fravarané mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaesho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha.

Athro' Ahurahe Mazdao* puthra,? tava‘ atarsh> puthra®’ Ahurahe
Mazdao.’ Athro* Ahurahe Mazdao’ puthra," khvarenanghd" savangho”
mazdadhatahe’ airyanam"™ khvarend'* mazdadhatanam,'’ kavayehe-
cha!” khvarenangho'* mazdadhatahe,” athro*” Ahurahe Mazdao”!
puthra.” Kavdish* haosravanghahe,“ vardish* haosravanghe”®
asnavantahe”’ gardish?® mazdadhatahe” chaéchishtahe* vardish*!
mazdadhatahe,” kavayehecha* khvarenangh6o* mazdadhatahe,* athro**
Ahurahe Mazdao*’ puthra.** Raévantahe® gardish* mazdadhatahe,"
kavayehecha” khvarenanghd* mazdadhatahe,“ athro* Ahurahe
Mazdao* puthra.‘”7 Atarsh* spenta® rathaéshtara,* yazata*'! pouru-
khvarenangha,” yazata® pouru-baéshaza.™ Athro* Ahurahe Mazdao™
puthra,*” mat*® vispaeibyo”® aterebyo,” khshathré-nafedhro” nairy6-
sanghahe® yazatahe® khshnaothra™ yasnaicha® vahmaicha®~
khshnaothraicha” frasastayaécha,® yatha Ahu vairy6® zaota” fra-me”™
mrite” atha ratush ashat-chit hacha” fra ashava vidhvao™ mraotu.”

For the propitiation (of the Creator, Ahura Mazda) in the Gah so and so)
of the Fire’, the purifier’ (of all things) pertaining to Ahura Mazda,’ O Fire®
the purifier® (of all things) pertaining to Ahura Mazda;’ of the Fire® (Adar
**Farohaba), the purifier’? (of all things) of “Thine* pertaining to Ahura
Mazda; of the glory’! (and) lustre’? created by Ahura Mazda;"? of the
Iranian’* and Kayanian'’ Glory'® created by Ahura Mazda;'° of the Fire’?

ga “Puthra” (Sanskrit “‘putra”) - the ordinary meaning of the word is “son” but the meaning of
this word in this Nyayesh everywhere derived from the Sanskrit root pu- (= to purify, to render
pure) is “source of purifying, cleaning” and I have thought it proper to translate “purifier” deriv -
ing from it.

gb About this Fire it is stated in the commentary of the Pahlavi version that it presides over the
Mobeds, Dastoors and saintly persons. It is also called “Adar Farah”. In the Pahlavi Book
Bundahishn it is stated that this Fire was first enthroned on the Mount, ““Gadman-Homand” situ-
ated in the province of ““Khvarzam” on the shores of the River Oxus. After the death of king
Jamshid, it was saved from the clutches of Zohak. During the time of king Gushtasp it was re-
moved from the Khvarzam, and brought to the Mount, “Roshan” situated in Kabulastan, where
this very Fire was existing up to the period of Bundahishn.

gc The connection of the words of genitive singular in this paragraph should be taken with the
words “Yasnaicha vahmaicha, khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha yatha Ahu Vairyo zaota fra-me
mrite” occuring at the end of the same paragraph.


--- Page 68 ---

52 KHORDEH AVESTA

(Adar *“Goshasp), the purifier (of all things) pertaining of Ahura Mazda;”! of
(the King) Kaikhasrou™ of the Kayanian (descent)*? and of the Lake of (the
king) Kaikhasrou (situated in the city of *Ataropatakan); of the **Mount”®
Asnavant?’ created by Ahura Mazda” of the *"Lake*! Chaechasta® created by
Ahura Mazda; the Fire** (called *Adar Burzin) the purifier** (of all things)
pertaining to Ahura Mazda;*’ the Mount “Raevant*? created by Ahura
Mazda;"' the Kayanian®” Glory® created by Ahura Mazda; of the Fire,* the
purifier’’ (of all things) pertaining to Ahura Mazda;*° O Adar“ Yazata,*! the
beneficent,” “warrior (against the demons), full of glory,” healing virtues!
* of the Fire,** the purifier (of all things) pertaining to Ahura Mazda*? —
together with®* of all® the Fires; of the yazata® *'Nairyosang,” residing in
the navel (or source) of kings” — for the *"worship® (of all these) for (their)
praise, propitiation®’ and glorification, let the officiating priest”? (zaotar)
proclaim” to me”! (the excellences of sacred verses of) Yatha Ahi Vairyo.
Let (the Raspi) (who) (is) righteous” and learned” pronounce” (the
excellences of these verses) atha ratush ashat-chit hacha.”

gd In the Pahlavi Commentary the King Kaikhusrou, after conquering “Beheman Diz” en-
throned this Fire. It presides over the heroes and soldiers. It is also known as the Fire of Light-
ning.

ge In the Pahlavi Commentary.
gfi.e., of that lake where king Kaikhusrou prayed standing.

gg It was the abode of the Fire, Adar Gushasp enthroned by king Kaikhusrou on the Mount situ-
ated near the Lake Chaechast.

gh Some of our Dasturs have understood the “Chaechasta” as the name of the Cave, but it is the
name of a lake, and not a cave. This fact is clearly seen from the Avan Yasht, para 49; Gosh
Yasht, para 18, and Ashishvangh Yasht para 38. For both these Avesta words, “‘Vairi” (i.e. lake)
and “vara” (i.e. enclousure, cave) there is only one and the same equivalent “var” in Pahlavi;
hence this seems to have been mistaken. According to the statement in Napekh-ut-taw arikh,
King Kaikhushrou, till the time he passed away from this material world, was fully engrossed in
the prayers of God on the Mount Nihavand. The Lake Chaechasta is situated in Azarbaizan and
at present it is compared with the Lake Urumiyah.

gi In the Pahlavi Commentary this Fire presides over Vastryosh, i.e. agriculturists, and “Adar
Burzin Meher” is also known as “Adar Meher Burzin’”. About this Fire it is stated in the Pahlavi
Bundahishn and Persian Rivayets that Holy Zarathushtra brought this Fire in the court of King
Gushtasp, and its excellence was that the Fire was always kept buring bright without fuel, san-
dalwood and frankincense, incense, and was not extinguished by anything.

gj There was the place for the Fire “Adar Burzin” on this Mount.

gk Fire is powerful weapon against the demons, impurity, uncleanness, etc. Besides, the persian
Rivayets we get such writing in the Avesta itself; see Vendidad, Fargard VIII. para 80.

gl Neryosang is the name of the Fire as well as an Angel. As Fire, it resides in the heart of kings
and assists them in the management of their state. As an Angel, he is the Messenger of the Cre-
ator, Ahura Mazda.

gm From the beginning of this paragraph up to this place the connection of all the words that oc-
cur in genitive singular ends here.


--- Page 69 ---

ATASH NYAYESH 53

(1) *Yasnemcha! vahmemcha’ huberetimcha’ ushta-beretimcha,*
vanta-beretimcha,’ afrinami,° tava’ Atarsh® puthra®? Ahurahe Mazdao,"°
yesnyo" ahi’ vahmyod," yesnyo' buyao' vahmyo' nmanahu”’
mashyakanam"™ Ushta” buyat?? ahmai’’ naire,” yase*-thwa™* badha*
frayazaite,”° aesm6-zast6,”’ baresm6-zast6,”* gao-zast6,” havan6-zasto.”°

(1) O Fire,’ the purifier? (of all things) pertaining to Ahura Mazda!’° I
praise® Thy worship,’ invocation,” good? health-giving and friendly gift.* (O
Fire), thou art'? worthy of worship'! and invocation;'? mayest thou be!*
worthy of worship" and invocation'® in the abodes’’ of men!'* May there be”
greatness’ (or happiness’’) unto that?! man”? who’? shall always” worship”®
thee™ with fuel Baresman,”* milk, and mortar in hand.*°

(1) Daity6! aésme’ buydo,* daityd* baoidhi®’ buydo,° daityd’ pithwi®
buyao,’ daityo"” upasayene" buyado.” Perenadyush”® harethre'* buyao,*
dahmayush" harethre”’ buyao,'* atarsh’” puthra”” Ahurahe Mazdao.”!

(2) (O Fire, the purifier of all things pertaining to Ahura Mazda), mayest
thou be* proper’ in fuel?! incense*! nourishment*®! (and) mayest thou be!”
proper” in logs of wood"'! O Fire,' the purifier” (of all things) pertaining to
Ahura Mazda! mayest thou be'* provided with food'* for a long time’?!

(3) Saoche! buye? ahmya’ nmane,* mat-saoche’ buye® ahmya’ nmane,°
raochahi’ buye’’ ahmya" nmane,” vakhshathe”® buye’ ahmya'> nmane,"®
dareghemchit” aipi'® zrvanem,!? upa”’ siram”! frash6-keretim,” hadha”
sirayao* vanghuyao” frasho-keretoit.”®

(3) (O Fire!) (until'’) for a long!’ time,’’ up to” (the time of) the mighty”!
*°Renovation,” mayest thou be? burning’ in this’ house* (i.e. be ever
burning)! in brilliance’ (and) mayest thou be"* in increase’? in this'> house!'®

(1) Dayao! me? Atarsh? puthra* Ahurahe Mazdao,° asu° khvathrem,’
asu thraitim,’ dsu’ jitim,” pouru” khvathrem,’ pouru”™ thraitim,'s
pouru”¢ jittm;!” mastim,'* spano,” khshviwrem” hizvam”! urune” ushi,”*
khratiim” paschaéta*> masita” mazaontem,” apairi-athrem,” nairyam”
paschaéta*® ham-varetim.*!

(4) (The person who recites; O Fire, the purifier* (of all things) pertaining
to Ahura Mazda!° grant (thou' unto) me (the things mentioned below):

Explanation:- (As to what things the reciter of this Nyayesh asks
through the Fire or as to what wishes he desires to get fulfilled are stated in

gn The portion from here up to the words, “Ashahe bereja yaozdatan” at the end of this Nyayesh
is taken from Yasna Ha 62.

go The original meaning of “hadha” (comparing to Sanskrit saha) is, “together with, accompan-
ied by”:- e.g. “hadha-aesma”, i.e. together with esam — fuel.” # These words, “hadha stirayao
vanghuyao frasho keretdit” according to my opinion are the commentary of, “upa siram frash6-
keretim”, although there is a difference in cases of both. Pahlavi translator has also regarded this
similarly. Harlez, Mills and Darmesteter have also translated in the same way.


--- Page 70 ---

54 KHORDEH AVESTA

the following lines and in paras 5 and 6):

Immediate® (or without delay) comfort,’ sustenance,’ (long) life’,
happiness,'? greatness,'* wisdom,’ fluent” tongue”’ (and) intelligence™ for
(my) soul” and intellect** (which may) increase*’ in proportion’ after’
(having received it) and (may) not diminish,” and (afterwards)** strength*! of
manliness”? (all these, O Fire, do thou grant me).

(5)  Eredhv6-zangam,' akhvafnyam’? thrishim* asnamcha*
khshafnamcha*® 4sitd-gatim,® jaghaurum,’ tuthrusham,® 4snam°
frazaintim,’® karsh6-razim,"' vyakhanam,” ham-raodham,' hvapam,"
anzo-bizim’ hviram, ya!’ me fradhayat nmanemcha”’ visemcha”!
zantumcha, dakhyimcha” danghu-sastimcha.”4

(5) Strength for standing firm-footed,' wakefulness? (during the
remaining period) (except) one-third’ of the days* and nights,° “steadiness in
one’s own duty,° watchfulness’ (and) an offspring’® (that is ) nourishing,*® of
innate wisdom,’ ruling over the region," sitting in the assembly,” thoroughly
developed,’ possessed of good respect,'* delivering from distress,'> as
powerful as a hero,'° (such an offspring, O Fire of Ahura Mazda! do thou
grant me): Who i.e. (the offspring) may render my'* house”, (my) clan,?!
(my) town,” (my) country”? and the the “religion of (my) country*
prosperous’”

(6) Dayo! me? Atarsh? puthrat Ahurahe Mazdao,> ya° me’ anghat®
afrasaonghao,? niremcha’ yavaéchataite,’ vahishtem Ahim”
ashaonam” raochanghem" vispo-khvathrem* zaze-buye’’ vanghaucha”’
mizde,'* vanghaucha” sravahi,”° urunaécha”! dareghe” havanghe.”

(6) O Fire, the purifier (of all things) pertaining to Ahura Mazda! Do thou
grant' me? (that thing) which® may be® the instructor’ for me,’ may guide me
now’ and for ever'' (i.e up to the end of my life), about the best world (i.e.
Paradise)"* of the righteous (people),’* bright’* (and) all-comfortable.!> (And)
may I obtain'® that paradise in good'’ rewards,'* in (return for the good”
homage” and in (exchange of) holiness*’ of (my) soul”! for a long duration.”

Explanation:- (O Fire of Ahura Mazda! Do thou grant me such
knowledge and point out such a course so that I may perform virtuous deeds,
I may pay homage to Ahura Mazda and lead my soul to goodness, so that
after my passing away I may obtain for my good deeds the exalted place of
Heaven in return).

gp It is noticed from this that except in the case of sickness or uneasiness more than eight hours
should not be employed in sleep. The words “thrishum asnamcha khshafnamcha” seems to be a
commentary of “akhvafnyam”. Watergaard has inserted these words in ( ) and Geldner has taken
them in footnotes.

gq “Quick to rise up from bed” (Darmesteter): “‘ Speed in walking “ (Harlez).

gr Sovereignty, Empire (Prof. Darmesteter); one’s own country (Dr. Harlez)


--- Page 71 ---

ATASH NYAYESH 55

(6) Vispaéibyd! sastim? baraiti? Atarsh* Mazdao Ahurahe® yaéibyo°
aém’ ham-pachaite® khshafnimcha’ siirimcha’ vispaéibyo hacha"™
izyeite’ huberetimcha’ ushta-beretimcha'’* vanta-beretimcha,'
Spitama.'°

(7) O Spitaman'® (Zarathushtra)! That Fire* of Ahura Mazda’ carries?
admonition? unto all' for whom? that’ (fire) cooks® the “evening and “noon
meals?-'° (i.e. gives them good understanding) (and) from all" he solicits!” a
good, healthful and friendly offering.'°

(8) Vispanam!' para-charentam? Atarsh? zasta‘ adidhaya.* Chim®
hakha’ hashe® baraiti®? fraeharethvao'’ armaéshaidhe." Atarem”
Spentem” yazamaide,'* takhmem!* hantem’* rathaéshtarem.'”

(8) The Fire? looks at* the hands* of all’ comers’ (and says:) What*® does
the walking’ friend’ bring’ to the sitting’! *“friend? *’We praise'* the Fire,’
the beneficent,'> powerful,’> shining’® (or existing'®) (and ) the warrior’’
(against the demons).

(9) Aat! yezi?-she? aém‘ baraiti’ aésmem* va’ ashaya* beretem,°
baresma! va" ashaya” frastaretem,” urvaram"™ va! hadhanaepatam’®
a-he'” paschaé@ta'* frinaiti!? Atarsh?? Mazdao Ahurahe,”' khshnito”
atbishto” haghdhanghim.™”

(9) But’ if? any person‘ brings* unto that (fire)’ either fuel® religiously’,
(with sincere heart) or? Baresman’® spread,’ or’* the (fragrant) plant'*
(called) Hadhanaepata,'® unto that (offerer)'’ sanctimoniously, then the Fire”
of Ahura Mazda”! being pleased,” “revered” (and) satisfied gives a
blessing’® (as follows).

Upa-thwa' hakhshoit? géush? vanthwa,’ upa viranam® pourutas.°
Upa-thwa’ verezvatcha® mano,’ verezvaticha’’ hakhshoit'" anguha.”
Urvakhsh's-anguha™ gaya'’’ jighaésha,’* tao’? khshapan6" yao” jvahi,”
Imat?! athro” afrivanem,? yo" ahmai?> aésmem”’ baraiti?” hikush,”*
raochas-pairishtan” ashahe™ bereja*! yaozdatan.”

(10) Unto thee! (i.e. in thy family) may the flock* of cattle? increase!”

Am”

gs In Persian the meaning of “Sham” is both (night and night meal).

gt Like Sanskrit Shura = Sun, Persian Sham (night and night meal) or, alternatively, dinner (Per-
sian Sura); Darmesteter gives the meaning of Khshafnimcha stirimcha” as, “lunch and dinner”.

gu Walking friend means the person going near the Fire, and the sitting friend should be under-
stood as Fire, which itself cannot walk.

gv This last sentence (atarem ....... rathaéshtarem) is left out by Geldner.

gw “a-tbisht6” also means “unoffended”, “not disrespected, not disliked by, not becoming re-
vengeful”.


--- Page 72 ---

56 KHORDEH AVESTA

(Unto thee) may there be? an increase® of heroic “men*! May thou’ *havel!
an active’ mind!? May (thy) “life! be!! active!!® Mayest thou live (thy) a
joyous'* life,'> those!’ nights'® that'? thou livest!?? This?! (i.e. mentioned
above) (is) the blessing” of the Fire” (for him) who” brings?’ to that (fire)
dry ™fuel,?° examined in the light”? (and) purified with the blessings*! of
righteousness.*°

(To recite in baz) Ahura Mazda Khodae, awazini mardum, mardum
sardagan hama_ sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem _behedin
mazdayasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad; aediin bad. (To recite aloud)
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrindmi athro Ahurahe
Mazdao puthra, tava atarsh puthra Ahurahe Mazdao, athrd Ahurahe
Mazdao puthra. Khvarenanghd savanghd mazdadhatahe, airyanim
khvarend mazdadhatanam, kavayehecha khavarenanghd
mazdadhatahe, aAthrd  Ahurahe Mazdao_ puthra. Kavdish
Haosravanghahe, vardish MHaosravanghahe, Asnavantahe  gardish
mazdadhatahe, Chaéchistahe vardish mazdadhatahe, kavayehecha
khvarenanghd mazdadhatahe, athrd Ahurahe Mazdao _puthra.
Raévantahe gardish mazdadhatahe, kavayehecha khvarenanghd mazda-
dhatahe, athro Ahurahe Mazdao puthra.

Atarsh Spenta rathaéshtara, yazata pouru-khvarenangha, yazata
pouru-baéshaza, athro Ahurahe Mazdao puthra, mat vispatibyo
aterebyo khshathro-nafedhro nairy6-sanghahe yazatahe. Ashem Vohi 3.

I praise, "worship with veneration, vivacity and strength of the Fire, etc.,
the purifier (of all things ) pertaining to Ahura Mazda.

At! toi? dtarem? Ahura‘

aojonghvantem® Asha° usemahi’
asishtem,® émavantem,’stoi-

rapentem,” chithra-avanghem;"!

At? mazda® daibishyante™ zastaishtaish '
dereshta’® "aénanghem."””

gx i.e. sons having heroic strength, mighty progeny; see the passage “dasta amem” at the end of
Mah Bokhtar Nyayesh.

gy 1.e. may your mind be thoughtful; mayest thou be clever and intellectual!
gz i.e. mayest thou perform benevolent and virtuous deeds!

ha The significance of the sentence “fuel examined in the light and purified” is that the fuel is
selected after examining in the light and after removing the bark wherein small insects and pol-
luted things may not be covered. The fuel, sandalwood and any other incense which may be put
on fire should be absolutely dry and cleansed. Any kind of wet and dirty fuel should never be
put on the fire. A strict order about this is enjoined in our religious books and Persian Rivayets.

hb For its translation and full explanation, see introductory verses above.


--- Page 73 ---

ATASH NYAYESH 57

Ashem Vohi 1. Ahmai raéshacha: Hazanghrem; Jasa me Avanghe
Mazda; Kerfeh Mozd.

O Ahura Mazda*! through Asha (i.e. Holy immortal Ardibehesht),° we
wish’ (or approve) thy* mighty,’ swiftest,’ powerful,’ ever bestowing
delight,'® help the Fire’ in various ("‘wonderful) ways.'!' O Ahura Mazda!"
(the fire) with (its) sufficient "vigour'> (is) holding fast!® (or chastising) the
tormentor" or the revengeful person.'’

“Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan), mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan), namaz dadare gehan daman. Khashnaothra
Ahurahe Mazdao, nemase-te atarsh Mazdao Ahurahe hudhao mazishta
yazata. Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje Khoreh awazayad?

(If one recites Atash Nyayesh in the Atash Adaran, one should recite as
below):

Atash‘ Beheram* Adar° fara.’

May the lustre' (and) glory’ of the fire? of the exalted’ Atash* Behram*
increase!?

(If one recites Atash Nyayesh in the Atash Adaran, one should recite as
below):

Atash* Adaran’ Adar® fara’

May the lustre’ (and) glory’ of the fire® of the exalted’ Atash* Adaran*°

increase}?

(If one recites Atash Nyayesh before the fire in the house, one should
recite as below):

Atash‘* Dadgah’ Adar’ fara’

May the lustre! (and) glory” of the fire® of the exalted’ Atash* Dadgah’*
increase!?

Adaran® Shah’ pirozgar,'” Adar Gushasp" Adar Khordad,'” Adar
Burzin Meher’ avare'! adaran'S o atashan,'® ke pa dadgah" neshast
ested;'® gorje’’ khoreh”” awazayad”! minodkarko” amavand” pirozgar™
amavandth** pirozgarth.“ Dad Din beh Mazdayasnan, agahi ravai
goafarangant bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad, man Ano 4wayad

shudan, man 4no 4wayad shudan, man ano awayad shudan. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

he This whole stanza is taken from Yasna Ha 34, stanza 4.
hd Sanskrit Chitra = various, different, of various kinds; wonderful.
he Original meaning “wished for strength”.

hf For translation, see above.


--- Page 74 ---

58 KHORDEH AVESTA

May the lustre’ (and) glory’ (of all these Fire) of the victorious’’ Lord’
Adaran,® Adar Gushasp,'! Adar Khordad,’? Adar Burzin Meher™ (and)
other’ Adaran!> and Fires!® which are installed in the Dadgah” (i.e in their
proper places) increase!? May the lustre’? (and) glory”® (of the Fire called)
Mino "Karko” increase!

May the powerful” (and) victorious™* (Fire) (come unto my help) for

(my) courage* and victory!*°

(Recite facing the south): Dadare gehan dine mazdayasni dade
Zarthushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sura Anahite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem urvaire vanguhi mazdadhate ashaone. Ashem Vohi 1.

Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao (recite bowing the head downward)
nemase-te Atarsh Mazdao Ahurahe hudhao mazishta yazata. Ashem
Vohi 1.

HAVAN GAH

(Note: This same Gah should be recited during the period of Second
Havan as well, i.e. from the Month Avan, Roz Hormazd up to Vahishtoisht
Gatha. For further explanation see note given to “the five gahs to be recited
separately”).

(1) Khshnaothra! Ahurahe Mazdao.? Ashem Vohi 3. Fravarane*
mazdayasno‘ ZarathushtrishS vidaévo® Ahura-tkaeshd.’ Havanée®
ashaone’ ashahe” rathwe,'"' yasnaicha’” vahmaicha’’ khshnaothraicha™
frasastayaécha.'* Savanghée'’’ visyaicha’’ ashaone'® ashahe’ rathwe,”’
yasnaicha” vahmaicha” khshnaothraicha” frasastayaécha.”4

(2) Mithrahe* vouru-gaoyaotdish** hazanghro-gaoshahe,”’ baévare-
chashmano,” aokhtd-namand” yazatahe,’ Ramand-_ khvastrahe,!
khshnaothra* yasnaicha*®* vahmaicha™ khshnaothraicha*
"frasastayaécha,*> yatha Aha Vairyd*’ zaota* fra me mrite’ atha
ratush ashatchit hacha*! fra ashava® vidhvao* mraoti.“

(1-2) (May there be) propitiation’ of (the Creator) Ahura Mazda!? I
"profess myself (to be) a worshipper of Ahura Mazda,‘ a follower in
accordance with the Religion proclaimed by the prophet Zarathushtra,° the
abstainer from (the malpractices of) daevas® (and) the follower of the
doctrines of Ahura Mazda.’ During the time of holy and pure Havan® in

hg About this Fire it is stated that it is forever burning near the Creator Ahura Mazda.

hh In the beginning of this, as well as other Gahs, the words, “Yasnaicha, vahmaicha,
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha” occur more than once, but their meanings are to be taken once.

hi For its explanation, see note on Srosh Baj.


--- Page 75 ---

HAVAN GAH 59

which the work of "Savanghi (i.e. business of gaining profit) and of Visya
(i.e. lord of the clans) go on for the pleasure*®’ of the Creator Ahura Mazda,
through the propitiation®” of Meher Yazata,* of wide pastures,” of thousand
ears,’’ and ten thousand eyes* (and) of the spoken name” and of Ram
Khvastar, for the worship,* for (their) invocation,* for (their) propitiation*®
and for (their) glorification,** let the officiating priest** proclaim” to me*?
(the excellences of the verses of) Yatha Ahi Vairy6.*’ Let the Raspi (who is)
righteous” (and) learned*’ announce“ (the excellences of these verses) “atha
ratush ashat-chit hacha”.

(3) "‘Ahurem Mazdam! ashavanem? ashahe’ ratim‘ yazamaide;>
zarathushtrem® ashavanem’ ashahe® ratim? yazamaide;'° zarathush-
trahe" ashaon6” fravashim' yazamaide;'* Ameshe Spente!> ashaonam'®
yazamaide.”” (4) Ashaunam® vangushish” siirao”’ spentao”! fravashay6”
yazamaide,™ astvatd* manakhyacha* apandtemem”*  rathwam’
yazamaide** yaétushtemem” yazatanam*” hanghanushtemem*! ashahe?
rathavam® aiwinasanstemem,* jaghmushtemam* ashaond* ashahe*”’
rathwo* ratufritim® yazamaide.”

(3) We praise? Ahura Mazda' the holy? Lord* of Righteousness.* We also
praise'° "'Zarathushtra’ the holy’ Lord? of Righteousness.*

We revere’ the Fravashi'* of the Holy!’ Zarathushtra.'' We praise’’ the
"holy'*'§ Bountiful Immortals.'5 We worship? the good,’ heroic”? and
beneficent”! Fravashis” of the righteous.'* We praise*® the highest” (lord)
amongst the lords’’ of the corporeal (world)* and of the spiritual (world).”
We praise*® the most helpful” of the yazatas*® (and) the most worthy?!
amongst the lords* of righteousness* and most reaching, effective for help*
(and) the well-timed prayer,*® the most helpful*? for the holy*® lord*®® of
holiness.”

(5) Havanim ashavanem? ashahe’ ratim‘* yazamaide;* Haurvatatem®
ashavanem’ ashahe® ratim? yazamaide;'? Ameretatem" ashavanem”
ashahe® ratim' yazamaide;'* ahiirim'®’ frashnem'’ ashavanem"™®
ashahe!”” ratim?’ yazamaide,”) Ahiirim? tkaéshem”? ashavanem™
ashahe* ratiim’®’ yazamaide,”” yasnem™* surem” Haptanghaitim®”

hj Those words associated with each respective Gah- such as Savanghi, visya, fradat-fshu,
fradat-vira, berejya, nmanya, etc.... are generally regarded as the hamkars”. i.e. co-working
yazatas.

hk The portion from here up to “ratufritim yazamaide”. is taken from Yasna Ha 71, paras 2-3.

hl From this paragraph the exalted status of Holy Zarathushtra is seen. Moreover in Yasna Ha 16
the Holy Prophet is regarded as a “Yazata” of this world. On this subject, for further details, see
“Zartosht Namu” written by Sheth K.R. Cama, Chapter 12.

hm In the original formation the word “asho” is in the genetive plural. Spiegel and Darmesteter
also have translated accordingly. Unto the Bountiful Immortals of the righteous people, i.e. the
Bountiful Immortals whom the righteous people worship (Harlez); the Bountiful Immortals
(who) are the protectors of the righteous people (Mills).


--- Page 76 ---

60 KHORDEH AVESTA

ashavanem*! ashahe” ratim*’ yazamaide.*4

(5) We praise’ Havani' the holy? Lord‘ of holiness;? we praise'’ Khordad®
the holy’ Lord’ of Holiness;’ we praise'* Amardad'' the holy” Lord'* of
holiness;'? we praise”! the word to Ahura Mazda,’ the pious,!® lord?’ of
holiness.'? We praise?’ the Religion? pertaining to Ahura Mazda,” the
pious,” lord”® of holiness;”> we praise** yasna”* "’Haptanghaiti,*° efficacious”
(and) holy,*' Lord of* holiness.”

(6) Savanghaém! visimcha’ ashavanem’ ashahe‘ ratiim*® yazamaide,°
airyamanem’ ishim® ashavanem? ashahe!® ratim' yazamaide”
amavantem® verethrajanem," vitbaéshanghem, vispa!® tbaéshao””
taurvayantem!® vispa’ tbaéshao.”” titarentem;*! yd upemd,” yo~
madhem6,”> yo** fratemd,” zaozizuye* tard” manthrem* pancha*!
gathao.”

(6) We praise® Savanghi' and Visya,’ the holy’ lords’ of holiness;* we
praise’? (the prayer called) "Airyamana,’ the liked,* (lovable) the holy Lord!
of holiness,'® (which prayer is) powerful,'* victorious,’ keeping away from
hatred,’* (and) overcoming,'* removing”! all afflictions. Which” (i.e. Prayer
called Airyamana) is the uppermost” (beginning), the middle (and) the
concluding (portion) on the Holy Spell” of Five*! Gathas® for invoking
help,”® (i.e. the Prayer named Airyamana is the best amongst the Holy Spell
of five Gathas).

(6) Mithremcha' vouru-gaoyaoitim?’ yazamaide;* Ramacha
khvastrem* yazamaide;*> visyehe’ rathw6’ yasnaicha® vahmaicha’
vistmcha’’ ashavanem" ashahe” ratim'™ yazamaide." (8) Mithrem*
vouru-gaoyaoitim’® hazangra-gaoshem,”” baévare-chashmanem,'®
aokht@namanem” yazatem”’ yazamaide,! Rama _ khvastrem”
yazamaide.”

(7) We worship* Meher yazata' of the wide pastures;” we worship* Rama
Khvastar.* In order to worship® and praise’ the Lord’ Visya’ (i.e. pertaining to
clan) we revere’* the Holy" Visya,'° the lord’? of Righteousness.’? (8) We
worship”! Meher yazata'> of the wide pastures'® (who is) of a thousand ears!”
and ten thousand “eyes,'* (and) the Worshipful’? one (yazata) of the re-
nowned name ; we worship Rama Khvastar.”

hn i.e. we praise those Questions and Answers exchanged between the Creator Ahura Mazda
and the prophet Zarathushtra.

ho i.e. HaptanYasht (Vadi) Large, where in the description of the Seven Bountiful Immortals is
given. For further details, see note on the first paragraph of Haptan Yasht (Large).

hp Prayer “Airyaman” should be undrestood as Yasna Ha 54, called “A Airyema Ishyo”, see
note on para 5 of Ardibehesht Yasht.

hq For its explanation see note given on page 30.


--- Page 77 ---

HAVAN GAH 61

(9) "Thwam! atarem? Ahurahe Mazdao> puthrem‘ ashavanem*
ashahe® ratiim’ yazamaide;® hadha-zaothrem’ hadha-aiwyaonghanem,”
imat" baresma” ashaya'’ frastaretem,'* ashavanem' ashahe’® ratim”
yazamaide;'®> Apam'’ Naptarem” yazamaide;”' Nairim Sanghem”
yazamaide;** takhmem”™ damdish upamanem”> yazatem,” yazamaide;”’
iristanam”’ urvan6” yazamaide” yao*! ashaonam” fravashayo.*

(9) We revere® thee,' O Holy’ Fire,’ the purifier’ (of all things) pertaining
to Ahura Mazda,’ the lord’ of righteousness.° We revere this!’ Baresman’”
(which) together with the Libation’ (and) together with the Aiwyaonghana’®
(is) spread’* with holiness’; We also revere the Lord!’ of Righteousness.'°
We revere’ the Navel” of waters’; we revere* (the Fire named)
"SNeryosang.” We revere?’ the powerful yazata?® (named) 'Dami
Upamana;*> we worship*’ the souls” of the departed’® who*! are the
™Fravashis* of the righteous "(people).”

(10) Ratiim! berezantem’? yazamaide’? yim* Ahurem Mazdam,° yod°
ashahe’ apandtem6,® yo? ashahe jaghmishtem6."" vispa’” sravao™
Zarathushtri'* yazamaide;'*  vispacha'® hvarshta’’ shyaothna'®
yazamaide,” varshtacha” vareshyamnacha.”!

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

(10) We worship’ the exalted* Lord! who‘ (is) Ahura Mazda,° who (i.e.
Ahura Mazda) is the highest® in holiness (and) who? is most helpful’ in
Righteousness.'°

We revere’ all!* the sacred verses'* of (the Prophet) Zarathushtra,'* and
all’® well-performed’’ deeds'* (religious ceremonies), which have been
performed” and shall be performed hereafter.*!

(11) Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha afrinami, Mithrahe
Vouru-gaoyaoitdish hazanghro-gaoshahe, baévare-chashmand, aokhto-
namano yazatahe, Ramano khvastrahe. Ashem Vohi 1.

hr The portion from here up to the end (tanscha taoscha yazamaide) occurs in Yasna Ha 71,
paras 23-24. The initial word in it “Thwam” is appended.

hs For the explanation of Neryosang, see note at the end of the introductory verses above.

29 66,

ht The original meaning of “dami upamana” is “the picutre of wisdom”, “the smile of wisdom,”
“symbol of wisdom’. From this he is the presiding Angel over wisdom.

hu For explanation of the Fravashi and Soul see notes given on Khorshed Nyayesh verse 9
above.

hv We revere the souls of the dead who are the Fravashis of the righteous (Spiegel, Harlez, and
Mills) We worship the souls of the departed and the Fravashis of the righteous people
(Darmesteter).


--- Page 78 ---

62 KHORDEH AVESTA

Ahmai raescha, Hazanghrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

RAPITHWAN GAH

(1) Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 3. Fravarane
Mazdayasno Zarathuhtrish vidaévO Ahura-tkaesho. Rapithwinai®
ashaone’ ashahe” rathwe,'"' yasnaicha’” vahmaicha’’ khshnaothraicha™
frasastayaécha.'* Fradat-fshave zantumaicha'’ ashaone'® ashahe”
rathwe,” yasnaicha”' vahmaicha” khshnaothraicha™ frasastayaécha,”
(2) Ashahe vahishtahe* athrascha”* Ahurahe Mazdao,”’ khshnaothra”*®
yasnaicha” vahmaicha™” khshnaothraicha*! frasastayaécha,” yatha Aht
Vairyo* zaota fra me* mrite,** atha ratush ashat-chit hacha® fra
ashava® vidhvao” mraotu.”

(1-2) At the time”? of pure’ and holy’ period”? Rapithwan,* when (the
functions) of giving rest or relief to beasts,'* and the Lord or chieftain of the
town'’ (goes), for the pleasure** (of the Creator Ahura Mazda), for the
worship” of Ardibehest,”> the Fire*® of Ahura Mazda,”’ for (their) praise, for
(their) propitiation*! and for (their) glorification,” may the Zaotar* (i.e. the
officiating priest)** proclaim*® before us* (the excellences of the verses of)
Yatha Ahi Vairyo.*? May the Raspi (i.e. the assistant Priest) (who is) holy**
(and) learned in turn announce” (the excellances of these verses) atha ratush
ashat-chit hacha’”.

(3) Ahurem Mazdaim ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Zarathushtrem ashavanem ashahe ratiim yazamaide; Zarathushtrahe
ashaond fravashim yazamaide; Ameshe Spente ashaonam yazamaide.

(4) Ashaunim vanguhish sirao spentao fravashayO yazamaide,
astvat0 manakhyacha apanOdtemem rathwam yazamaide, yattushtemem
yazatanam, hanghanushtemem ashahe rathwam aiwinasanstemem,
jaghmishtemam ashaond ashahe rathwo ratufritim "Yyazamaide.

(5) Rapithwinem'! ashavanem? ashahe’ ratiim‘ yazamaide.*
Ahunavaitim® Gathaim’ ashaonim’ ashahe'’ ratim' yazamaide"”’
Ushtavaitim’ Gatham® ashaonim™ ashahe!® ratim’® yazamaide;!’
Spenta-mainyim’ Gatham” ashaonim” ashahe’! ratim” yazamaide,™
Vohi-khshathram™ Gatham”* ashaonim” ashahe”’ ratiim” yazamaide;”
Vahishtdishtim®” Gatham*! ashaonim™ ashahe® ratim*™ yazamaide.*

(5) We praise? Rapithwan! the holy,’ Lord’ of holiness,* we praise’! the
Gatha’ Ahunavaiti,° we praise!’ the Gatha’? Ushtavaiti,’* we praise*’ the
Gatha’? Spenta-mainyu,'® we praise” the Gatha’> Vohu-khshathra,™* and we
praise*> the Gatha*! Vahishtoishti,*° the holy,*? Lord™ of holiness.**

hw For the translation of paragraphs 3 and 4, see Havan Gah, above.


--- Page 79 ---

RAPITHWAN GAH 63

(6) Fradat-fshaum! zantumemcha? ashavanem?’ ashahe‘ ratiim*
yazamaide;® fshushemcha’ manthrem® yazamaide;’? arshukdhemcha”
vachem"  yazamaide;’ vacha'’*  arshukhudha’ yazamaide;'*
varethraghnish'®’ daevé-ghnita’’ yazamaide;'® apascha’ zemascha”
yazamaide”'; urvaraoscha,” mainyavacha” yazata™% yazamaide,* yoi*®
vanghazdao”’ ashavano;”* Ameshescha Spente” ashaonam”™ yazamaide.*!

(6) We praise® Fradat-fshu’' and Zantuma”,’ the holy? Lord’ of
Righteousness;* we praise’ "Fshusha’ manthra® (the hymn of prosperity);* we
praise” the word" truly-spoken.'®

We praise’* the words’? truly-spoken;'* we praise'® the victorious’® (sacred
verses) smiting the daevas;'’ we praise”! the waters,’ lands”’ and plants;” we
worship”> the heavenly* yazatas** who” (are) righteous” and bestowers of
better (things);?” we worship”! the righteous*’ Bountiful Immortals.”

(7) Ashaunam! vanguhish? sirao* spentao* fravashayo* yazamaide.°
Bareshniishcha’ ashahe® yat? vahishtahe”, mazishta! méanthra,”
mazishta'> verezya,'4 mazishta'S urvaithya,'® mazishta’’ haithya-
varezya,'® mazishta’ vindaithya”” daénayao”! méazdayasnoish”
yazamaide.*

(7) We worship® the excellent, heroic* and beneficent’ Fravashis® of the
righteous (people).' We worship® the chief points’ (the essence) of Asha®
Vahishta'® (and) the greatest'' Holy Spell” of the Religion?! of Mazda-
worship,” which are the greatest’? in causing effect,'* (which are very
effective), the greatest!’ in accomplishing (any) work,'® in performing just
actions’® (and) in acquiring (any want).

(8) Avat' vyakhnemcha? hanjamanemcha*® yazamaide,’ yat* asti®
Ameshaniam Spentanam,’ bareshnavo® avanghe’ ashnd’ ghimatem"
zantumahe” rathwo'> yasnaicha'’* vahmaicha,'’ zantumemcha"®
ashavanem"” ashahe!™ ratim” yazamaide.” (9) Ashem Vahishtem”!
ataremcha” Ahurahe* mazdao™ puthrem”* yazamaide.”

(8) For the worship“ of the Lord’ Zantuma” (i.e. Lord of the town) and
for (his) veneration,'> we worship‘ this' meeting’ and assembly’ (abode) of
the Bountiful Immortals’ which’ is® situated'' on the heights* of the yonder?
sky.'° We praise”? Zantuma'’® (the Lord of the town), the holy,'’ Lord!’ of
Righteousness.'* (9) We praise*® Ardibehesht,”! the Fire,” the purifier’? (of all
things) pertaining to Ahura Mazda.?>**

(10) Thwam Atarem Ahurahe Mazdao puthrem ashavanem ashahe
ratim yazamaide; hadha-zaothrem hadha-aiwyaonghanem  imat
baresma ashaya frastaretem, ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;

hx Yasna Ha 58 is generally called the Fshusha-manthra.

hy In the original formation this word is in genitive plural. See note to verse 4 above for further
details about it.


--- Page 80 ---

64 KHORDEH AVESTA

Apam Naptarem yazamaide; Nairim Sanghem yazamaide; takhmem
Damodish upamanemyazatem yazamaide; iristanadm urvand yazamaide
yao ashaonam 'fravashayd. (11) Ratiim berezantem yazamaide yim
Ahurem Mazdam, yo ashahe apandtemo, yO ashahe jaghmishtem6;
vispa sravao Zarathushtri yazamaide; vispacha hvarshta shyaothna
yazamaide, varshtacha vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho.
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

(12) Yasnemcha! vahmemcha? aojascha*? zavarecha‘* 4afrinami,*
Ashahe Vahishtahe’® athrascha’ Ahurahe Mazdao.* Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me Avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

(12) I praise® the worship,’ glory,” vivacity? and power* of Ardibehesht*®
the Fire’ of Ahura Mazda.*

UZIRIN GAH

(1) Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 3. Fravarane
mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésho. Uzyeirinai®
ashaone’ ashahe” rathwe,'"' yasnaicha’” vahmaicha’’ khshnaothraicha™
frasastayaécha,’* fradat-virai'® dakhyumaicha’’ ashaone'® ashahe’”
rathwe,” yasnaicha”' vahmaicha” khshnaothraicha™ frasastayaécha.*4
(2) Berezatd*> Ahurahe” nafedhr6”’ apam” apascha” mazdadhatay4éo,”
khshnaothra® yasnaicha* vahmiaicha® khshnaothraicha™ frasasta-
yaécha,* Yatha Ahi Vairyo* zaota*’ fra me** mrite,” atha ratush ashat-
chit hacha” fra ashava*! vidhvao® mraoti.*

(1-2) At the time!’ of pure’ (and) holy'® period" Uzirin® when it is time to
rest men from the work,'® and when the Lord or sovereign of the country”’
(goes) to worship the Creator Ahura Mazda,*! and to praise,*’ propitiate** and
glorify* the (very source of)”’ water,’® may the Zaotar*’ (i.e. the officiating
priest) proclaim® before me*® (the excellences of the verses of) Yatha Ahi
Vairy6.*° May (the Raspi) (i.e. the assistant Priest) (who is) holy*! (and)
learned” announce® (the excellences of these verses) atha ratush ashat-chit
hacha”.

(3) Ahurem Mazdam ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Zarathushtrem ashavanem ashahe ratiim yazamaide; Zarathushtrahe
ashaonOd fravashim yazamaide; Ameshe Spente ashaonam yazamaide.
(4) Ashaunam vanguhish sirdao spentao fravashayd yazamaide, astvato

hz For the translation of paragraphs 10-11, see Havan Gah, above.


--- Page 81 ---

UZIRIN GAH 65

manakhyacha apandtemem rathwam yazamaide; yaétushtemem
yazatanam hanghamishtemem ashahe rathwim awinasdnstemem,
jaghmishtemam ashaond ashahe rathwo ratufritim yazamaide.”

(5) Uzyeirinem! ashavanem’ ashahe’ ratiim‘* yazamaide;*
Zaotarem’ ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Havananem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Atarevakhshem ashavanem ashahe ratiim yazamaide;
Frabaretérem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Aberetem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;

Asnatarem ashavanem ashahe ratiim yazamaide;
Rathwishkarem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Sraoshavarezem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;

(5) We praise® Uzirin,' the holy,’ Lord of Righteousness;
we praise the Zaotar the holy, Lord of Righteousness;
we praise the Havanan the holy, Lord of Righteousness;
we praise the Atarvakhsi the holy, Lord of Righteousness;
we praise the Frabaretar the holy, Lord of Righteousness;
we praise the Aberetar the holy, Lord of Righteousness;
we praise the Asnatar the holy, Lord of Righteousness;
we praise the Rathwishkar the holy, Lord of Righteousness;
we praise the Sraoshavarezathe holy, Lord of Righteousness;

Explanation: In the above paragraphs various classes of Herbad, the
practising priests, are remembered with due respect. Moreover, from these
names, we (come to know) what function each type of priest performs:

Zaota, i.e. zoti or the performer of principal ceremony;

Havanan, i.e. the priest who strains the Haoma and performs the
ceremony;

Atarvakhsha, i.e. Atarvakhshi, whose function is to keep the fire burning;

Frabaretar, i.e. the priest who brings to the Zaotar all the implements
and other things (articles) required for the ceremonies;

Abereta (= 4p + beretar), a man in holy orders, who provides for the
sacred water used in religious ceremonies and for purificatory purposes;

Asnatar, i.e. the priest in holy orders who purifies defiled persons,
as well as, the utensils used for ceremonial purposes;

Rawthwishkara, i.e. a priest who performs all the accessory services,
such as adjusting the ceremonial utnesils and putting them in proper order;

Sraoshavareza, i.e. a priest in whose presence a sinner confesses his
misdeeds and makes amends for them, and the officer who keeps good

ia For the translation of paras 3 and 4, see Havan Gah above.


--- Page 82 ---

66 KHORDEH AVESTA
discipline.”

(6) Fradat-virem! dakhymemcha? ashavanem’ ashahe* ratim*
yazamaide;®  stréushcha’ mdaonghemcha®  hvarecha’?  raochao'®
yazamaide;" anaghra’” raochao’ yazamaide;'* afrasanghamcha’
khvathrem” yazamaide;"’ ya" narsh” sadra” dregvatd.”! (7) Haithyava-
rezem” ashavanem™ ashahe™* ratim?> yazamaide;* aparemcha”’
tkaéshem” yazamaide;” haithyavarezem*® ashavanem*! ashaon6” stim™
yazamaide;* paiti*® asni paiti khshafne,** yas6-beretabyo*’ zaothrabyo,*
dakhyumahe” rathwo” yasnaicha*! vahmaicha;? dakhumemcha*
ashavanem“ ashahe* ratiim* yazamaide.” (8) Berezantem* ahurem”
khshathrim,” khshaétem,*' apam* napatem*  aurvat-aspem™
yazamaide;* apemcha* Mazdadhatam* ashaonim* yazamaide.”

(6) We® praise “Fradat-vira” and “Dakhyuma”,’ the holy,’ Lord’ of
Righteousness;* we praise’! the stars’ and the moon® and the sun’ and
luminaries;!° we praise!* the boundless” lights;'? we praise’* the “splendour'®
of the doctrines'> which (are as it were) the “woes” of the sinful?! person.'?
(7) We praise** the Lord* of Righteousness™ (who is) holy”? and practising
righteous or virtuous deeds;” we praise” the later?” “lore.?* We praise** the
creation®* of Holy” (Ahura Mazda), the Lord* of the country” with
libations** brought for the yasna;*’ we praise*” day** and night*’ the Lord*! of
righteousness* (who is the chieftain) (pertaining) to the holy“ country.* (8)
We praise the “Navel® of the Waters,” the exalted** Lord,” swift-footed™
horse (who is) imperial,*’ and shinning,*! we praise® the pure™® water
created by Ahura Mazda.*’

(9) Thwam atarem Ahurahe Mazdao puthrem ashavanem ashahe
ratim yazamaide; hadha-zaothrem hadha-aiwyaonghanem  imat
baresma ashaya frastaretem, ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Apam Naptarem yazamaide; Nairim Sanghem yazamaide: takhmem
Damodish upamanem yazatem yazamaide; iristanam urvand yazamaide
yao ashaonam fravashayo. (10) Ratim berezantem yazamaide yim
Ahurem Mazdam, yo ashahe apanotemd, yO ashahe jaghmishtem6;
vispa sravao Zarathushtri yazamaide; vispacha hvarshta shyaothna

ib “Sraoshavareza - a priest in whose presence a sinner confesses his misdeeds and atones for
them. A keeper of a weapon in hand to drive away demons and drujas at the time when the cere-
mony is being performed”. (Prof. Harlez).

ic The lustre of the divine songs (Professor Harlez). afrasangha = Sanskrit prashansa, prashasti =
praise, fame.

id The good admonition appears to the wicked person, misery or rather poison. See Vispered 18
Karda, para 2; Yasna Ha 45, para 7.

ie Its purport is that the comparison of the Religion of the Poryotkeshas, flourished prior to Holy
Zarathushtra may be applied to the Religion of Zarathushtra revealed by Ahura Mazda.

if Generally he is regarded as a Yazata and he keeps connection with the watery clouds, light-
ning and rain. Its equivalent in Sanskrit is, Apam Napat.


--- Page 83 ---

UZIRIN GAH 67

yazamaide, varshtacha vareshymnachya.
Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahur6 vaétha ashat hacha;
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.
(11) Yasnemcha! vahmemcha? aojascha*? zavarecha‘ afrinami,‘

berezatd® ahurahe’ nafedhro* apam’ apascha'’’ mazdadhatayao. Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

(11) I praise,* worship,’ with veneration,’ vivacity? and power* of the
Navel® of the waters’ the exalted® Lord’ of the waters’? created by Ahura
Mazda."

AIWISRUTHREM GAH

(1) Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 3. Fravarané
mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésh6, aiwisrithremai®
aibigayai? ashaone!’ ashahe! rathwe,’ yasnaicha® vahmaicha™
khshknaothraicha® frasastayaécha,'° fradat-vispam-hujyaitée”’
zarathushtrotemaicha'* ashaone’” ashahe” rathwe,”! yasnaicha”
vahmaicha* khshnaothraicha“ frasastayaécha.> (2) Ashaunam,”
fravashinam””’ ghenanamcha*® virdvanthwanam,”  yairyaoscha*’

hushitdish,*! amahecha*” hutashtahe** huraodhahe*
verethraghnahecha* ahuradhatahe,® vanaintyaoscha  uparatato,””
khshnaothra* yasnaicha® vahmaicha” khshnaothraicha*!

frasastayaécha,” yatha Ahu vairy6* zaota“ fra mé“ mrite, atha ratush
ashat-chit hacha” fra ashava® vidhvao” mraoti.°

(1-2) At the time’ of the holy’® and pure!! period”? of Aiwisruthrema,* the
guardian over life’, when (the act) of giving prosperity to all the living
creatures!’ and when the power of the Pontiff'’ rests, for the pleasure** (of the
Creator Ahura Mazda), for the worship®’ of the Fravashis”’ of the righteous
(people),” women with their troops of heroes,” timely advent*’ of the
seasons,*” of (the yazata named) Ama,” well-made and beautiful,** Behram
yazata*® created by Ahura Mazda,*° and Vananti Uparatat*’ (i.e. of the yazata
presiding over the victorious ascendency), for (their) praise,*° (their)
propitiation*' and glorification,”may the Zaotar* proclaim** before me* (the
excellences of the sacred verses of) Yatha Ahi Vairyo.*? May (the Raspi)
(who is) pious* (and) learned® announce” (the excellences of the verse) atha
ratush ashat-chit hacha.*’

ig For the translation of paras 9-10, see Havan Gah.


--- Page 84 ---

68 KHORDEH AVESTA

(3) Ahurem Mazdaim ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Zarathushtrem ashavanem ashahe ratiim yazamaide; Zarathushtrahe
ashaonOd fravashim yazamaide; Ameshe Spente ashaonaim yazamaide.
(4) Ashaonam vanguhish sirdo spentao fravashayO yazamaide, astvatd
manakhyacha apandtemem rathwam _ yazamaide, yaétushtemem
yazatanam, hanghanushtemem ashahe rathwam aiwinasanstemem,
jaghmishtemam ashaond ashahe rathwo6 ratufritim yazamaide.”

(5) Aiwisrithremem! ashavanem? ashahe* ratim*® yazamaide;°
Aibigaim? ashavanem? ashahe* ratiim*® yazamaide;° thwam’ Aatarem®
Ahurahe Mazdao’ puthrem” ashavanem" ashahe” ratim® yazamaide;'4
asmana!s havana” ashahe”’ ratavo"® yazamaide;'? ayanghaéna” havana”!
ashahe” ratavo* yazamaide™ hadha-zaothrem* hadha-aiwydéong-
hanem” imat’’ baresma,”* ashaya” frastaretem* ashavanem*! ashahe”
ratim® yazamaide;* dpa urvaire* yazamaide;** aourvatam*’ urune®
ashavanem” ashahe” ratim* yazamaide®.

(5) We praise’ “Aiwisruthrema”’, the Righteous’, the Lord*® of
Righteousness*. We praise® the Righteous? (Aiwisruthrema) the Lord* of
Righteousness* (and) the guardian of Life”. We praise'* Thee’, the Righteous
Fire’, the purifier’? (of all things) pertaining to Ahura Mazda’, the Lord’ of
Righteousness!”. We praise”? the stone!’ Mortar'® (and) things “useful in
rituals”?! or to achieve for Righteousness'”'*; we praise™* this Baresman’’,
which is righteous*' spread* with holiness”, together with the Libation’, and
Aiwyaonghan”, things useful to be righteous; we worship** the waters and
the trees*; we praise” the perfection” of the Soul**, the righteous® soul

(and) the Lord*' of Righteousness”’.

(6)  Fradat-vispam-hujyaitim! ashavanem? ashahe’ _ ratiim*
yazamaide*; Zarathushtrem® ashavanem’ ashahe® ratim’ yazamaide";
manthrem'" Spentem’ ashavanem™ ashahe™ ratim'’ yazamaide";
géush'’” urvanem'® ashavanem’” ashahe” ratiim?! yazamaide”;
Zarathushtrétememcha”* ashavanem™ ashahe* ratim” yazamaide’’;
Zarathushtrem”’ ashavanem” ashahe” ratim*! yazamaide*.

(6) We praise’ “Fradat-vispam-hujyaiti’”, the Righteous’, the Lord of
Righteousness*; We praise’? Zarathushtra’, the Righteous’, the Lord’ of
Righteousness*; we worship'® the Beneficent!” Holy Spell!', the righteous’,
the Lord’> of Righteousness'*; we worship” the Soul'® of the Universe’’, the
righteous'’®, Lord?! of Righteousness’; we worship”’ the ‘High-priest”, the

ih For the translation of 3“ and 4" paragraphs, see Havan Gah.

ii The meaning of the word “ratu” when applied to intimate objects can be taken as “useful -
practical or worthy thing.” Moreover, its usual meaning is, “Lord, time, season”.

ij Justi; kindness, favour, good wishes (Harlez); sacred vows (Mills)

ik Zarathushtrotema, i.e. one strictly following or adherent to the doctrines of Zarathushtra.


--- Page 85 ---

AIWISRUTHREM GAH 69

holy™, the Lord*’ of Righteousness*. We worship* Zarathushtra’’, the
Righteous”, the Lord*' of Righteousness*’.

(7) Athravanem! ashavanem? ashahe? ratiim‘ yazamaide;‘
rathaéshtarem® ashavanem’ ashahe® ratiim’ yazamaide;" vastrim"™
fshuyantem” ashavanejn’ ashahe' ratim' yazamaide;'* nmanahe”’
nmano-paitim'’ ashavanem” ashahe” ratiim?! yazamaide;” vis0”> vis-
paitim™’ ashavanem” ashahe” ratim”’ yazamaide;”* zantéush” zantu-
paitim® ashavanem*' ashahe* ratim* yazamaide;* danghéush*
danghu-paitim® ashavanem*’ ashahe* ratum” yazamaide.”

(7) We praise® the Priest (i.e. Dastur-Mobed),! the righteous, the Lord of
Righteousness; we praise’° the Warrior’ (i.e. Royal Hero),° the righteous,’ the
Lord of Righteousness;* we praise'® the bringing of prosperity to the
Agriculturist,!' the righteous,'* the Lord’> of Righteousness;'* we praise” the
Lord of the House,’* the righteous, the Lord of Righteousness; we praise’®
the Lord™ of the Clans,** the righteous,” the Lord of Righteousness;*° we
praise** the Lord*® of the Town,” the righteous,*’ the Lord* of
Righteousness;** we praise“? the "Lord*® of the Country,** the righteous,°’
Lord*®® of Righteousness.**

(8) Yavanem! humananghem? huvachanghem’ hushyaothnem*
hudaénem ashavanem?’ ashahe’ ratiim® yazamaide;’? yavanem” ukhdho-
vachanghem" ashavanem” ashahe'’? ratim' yazamaide;' khvaétva-
dathem” ashavanem” ashahe" ratiim' yazamaide;”” dangha-urvaesem”!
ashavanem” ashahe*® ratiim’ yazamaide;* humaim” pairyathnem2’
ashavanem” ashahe” ratim*’ yazamaide;*! nmanahe” nman6-pathnim*®
ashavanem™ ashahe* ratiim® yazamaide.*”

(8) We praise’ the youth' of good thoughts,’ good words,* good deeds*
and good faith,’ the righteous,° Lord® of Righteousness.’ We praise’* the
youth,’® praying of God," the righteous,’? Lord’* of Righteousness.'* We
praise” the patriotic person,’ the righteous,'’ Lord’® of Righteousness;'® the
righteous (man)” coming from the land,”! the Lord of Righteousness; the
‘missionary?’ of good wisdom,” the righteous,”* lord*’ of Righteousness,”
and we revere*’ the Lady of the House,* the righteous,™ the Mistress** of
Righteousness.*°

(9) Nairikamcha! ashaonim’? yazamaide,’ frayd-humatam,’ frayo-
hikhtam,> frayé-hvarshtam,’ hush-ham-sastém,’ ratukhshathram,°®
ashaonim,’ yam" Armaitim Spentam," yaoscha” te ghenao,'* Ahura
il Original meaning of, “vis-paitim” is, “the master of the clans”; original meaning of, “Zantu-

paitim” is, “the master of the town”; original meaning of, “danghu-paitim” is “the master of the
country”.

im “the traveller in the land”, (Spiegel, Mills and Darmesteter).

in Its significance seems to be the propagator of the Religion of Zarathushtra abroad, and the
preacher of the doctrines of this good religion.


--- Page 86 ---

70 KHORDEH AVESTA

Mazda.'* Naremcha" ashavanem” yazamaide," frayo-humatem,” fray6-
hikhtem,” frayd-hvarshtem,”' vistd-fraoreitim,”? évistd-kayadhem,”
yenghe™* shyaothnaish* gaéthao” asha”’ fradente,* Zarathushtro-
temahe” rathwo* yasnaicha,*! vahmaicha” Zarathushtrdtememcha™
ashavanem™ ashahe* ratiim® yazamaide.*’ (10) Ashaunam** vanguhish”
sirao” spentao*' fravashayo” yazamaide;* ghenaoscha“ virdvanthvao*
yazamaide;* yairyamcha’ hushitim* yazamaide;*” amemcha*?
hutashtem*! huraodhem® yazamaide;** verethraghnemcha™ ahura-
dhatem® yazamaide;* vanaintimcha upartatem*’ yazamaide.**

(9) We praise* the righteous? woman,' richest in good thoughts,’ good
words’? and good deeds,° well and properly instructed,’ obedient to her
husband® (and) truthful’ (and) who"! (i.e. the woman) (is) like Spenta Armaiti
(Bountiful Immortal)"! and, O Hormazd,' like (other) ‘Feminine Powers"
created by you. (We praise such women having the qualities mentioned
above). We praise'® the righteous'’ man,'° richest in good thoughts,”’ richest
in good words” and richest in good deeds.*' understanding the faith” (i.e.
steadfast on the Religion)” (and) ignorant of sins;* through whose” actions”
for the worship*! of the highest Priest” and for (his) praise,** the world”® gets
prosperous*® by means of Righteousness.*’ We praise*’ the highest Priest,*
the righteous,** the Lord** of Righteousness.** (10) the excellent, heroic*®
and beneficent*! Fravashis” of righteous (people);** women“ with their
troops of heroes;* the timely advent*® of the seasons;*’ and the well-made,”
beautiful’? Ama (i.e. the yazata presiding over courage);*° and we praise*
Behram yazata™ created by Ahura Mazda; and we praise Vananti Uparatat.*’

(11) Thwam Atarem Ahurahe Mazdao puthrem ashavanem ashahe
ratim yazamaide, hadha-zaothrem hadha-aiwyaonghanem  imat
baresma ashaya frastaretem, ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Apam Naptarem yazamaide; Nairim Sanghem yazamaide; takhmem
Damdish Upamanem yazatem yazamaide, iristanadm urvand yazamaide
yao ashaonam fravashayo. (12) Ratim berezantem yazamaide yim
Ahurem Mazdam, yo ashahe apanotem6d, yd ashahe jaghmishtemd;
vispa sravao Zarathushtri yazamaide; vispacha hvarshta shyaothna
yazamaide varshtacha vareshyamnacha.”

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide,
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

(13) Yasnemcha! vahmemcha? aojascha*? zavarecha‘* 4frinami,>

io In the Zoroastrian Religion there are two types of angels, male and female. The feminine an-
gels are, Spandarmad, Avan, Din, Ashishvangh and Astad.

ip For the translation of paragraphs 11-12, see Havan Gah, above.


--- Page 87 ---

AIWISRUTHREM GAH 71

ashaunam® fravashinam’ ghenanamcha® virdvanthwanam,’ yairyaos-
cha! hushitdish,"| amahecha” hutashtahe’ huraodhahe," verethragh-
nahecha'* ahuradhatahe," vanaintyaoscha uparatato. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmai raéshcha, Hazanghrem, Jasa me Avanghe Mazda, Kerfeh
Mozd.

(13) I extol’ the worship,’ praise? vivacity> and the power* of the
Fravashis’ of the righteous (people),° and of the women® with their troops of
heroes,’ the timely advent"! of the seasons,'° the shapely,’ beautiful'* Ama
(i.e. yazata presiding over courage), Behram yazata,'’® created by Ahura
Mazda and Vananti Uparatat'’.

USHAHEN GAH

(1) Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 3. Fravarané
mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévod Ahura-tkaeshd. Ushahinai?®
ashaone’ ashahe!® rathwe" yasnaicha’” vahmaicha’ khshnaothraicha™
frasastayaécha.'* berejyai'® nmanyaicha’’ ashaone’ ashahe” rathwe,”’
yasnaicha?! vahmiaicha” khshnaothraicha®  frasastayaécha,* (2)
Sraoshahe* ashyehe* ashivatd?’ verethrajano* fradat-gaéthahe,”
Rashnaosh* Razishtahe,*! Arshtatascha® fradat-gaéthayao* varedat-
gaéthayao,™ khshnaothra®* yasnaicha** vahmaicha*’ khshnaothraicha®
frasastayaécha,” yatha Ahi Vairy6o” zaota' fra me” mrite,* atha
ratush ashat-chit hacha“ fra ashava* vidhvao” mraoti.”

(1-2) At the time” of the pure’ and holy’® period'! Ushahen® when it is
propitious to ask for one’s wishes'® to be fulfilled and when the authority, the
master of the house!’ (prays the creator Ahura Mazda),* through
propitiation*®> of Sraosha (yazata),*° the pure,”° holy,”’ victorious,*® bringing
prosperity to the world,” the Most Just*' Rashna (yazata),*° and Astad
(yazata),” the promoter and the increaser of the world,* for the worship (of
them all),*° praise*’, propitiation*® and for (their) glorification*? may the
Zaotar*! proclaim*? before me” (the excellences of the sacred verses of)
Yatha Ahi Vairyo.“° May (the Raspi who is) holy* (and) learned“,
announce’’ (the excellences of these verses) atha ratush ashat chit hacha.

(3) Ahurem Mazdaim ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Zarathushtrem ashavanem ashahe ratiim yazamaide; Zarathushtrahe
ashaonOd fravashim yazamaide; Ameshe Spente ashaonaim yazamaide.
(4) Ashaundm vanguhish siiraéo spentao fravashayd yazamaide, astvatd
manakhyacha apandtemem rathwam _ yazamaide, yaétushtemem
yazatanam, hanghanushtemem ashahe rathwam aiwinasanstemem,
jaghmishtemam ashaond ashahe rathwo ratufritim yazamaide."

(5) Ushahinem! ashavanem? ashahe* ratiim‘’ yazamaide;> usham®

iq For the translation, see Havan Gah, above.


--- Page 88 ---

72 KHORDEH AVESTA

sriram’ yazamaide;’ ushaonghem’ yazamaide,'’ khshoithnim" raévat-
aspam,” framen-naram, framen-nar6d-viram;" ya khvathravaiti'®
nmanavaiti;'’ ushaonghem'® yazamaide,” revim” renyat-aspam,”' ya”
sanat® avi™* hapto-karshvairim® zim; avam?’ usham”® yazamaide.”
Ahurem Mazdim* ashavanem*! ashahe” ratiim*? yazamaide;* vohi
mano* yazamaide;** Ashem Vahishtem*’ yazamaide;* khshathrem
vairim® yazamaide;“ Spentam*! vanguhim” Armaitim® yazamaide.“*

(5) We praise’ Usahahen Gah! the righteous,’ the Lord of righteousness;?
we praise® the beautiful’ Dawn,° the light of the Dawn,’ shining! with the
radiant horses,'? agreeable or pleasing to men,!° heroic men which’ (light)
(is) giving comfort and ease'® and belongs to the house and family.'’? We
praise!’ the light of the Dawn,’* agile”? (and) of nimble-paced horses”',
which” is spread”? upon™ the seven regions of the earth.*° We praise’ this’’
Dawn. We worship** Ahura Mazda,*° Righteous,*' Lord*? of
Righteousness.” We worship*® (the Holy Immortal) Vohu Manah;** we
worship** (the Bountiful Immortal) Asha Vahishta;*’ we worship*? (the
Bountiful Immortal) Sheherevar;*? we worship’ the good” Spandarmad
(Bountiful Immortal).*

(6) Berejim! ashavanem? ashahe* ratiim* yazamaide,° bereja‘®
vanghéush’ ashahe,® bereja’ daénayao'’ vanghuyao' mazdayasnoish,””
nmanyehe’ rathw6" yasnaicha’® vahmaicha’’ nmanimcha” ashavanem"®
ashahe” ratim” yazamaide.”!

(7) Sraoshem” ashim® huraodhem™ verethrajanem*  fradat-
gaéthem’’ ashavanem?’ ashahe”* ratim” yazamaide;** Rashniim*!
razistem” yazamaide,* Arshtatem™ fradat-gaétham*® varedat-gaétham”*
yazamaide.””

(6) We praise® Berejya' the righteous,’ Lord* of righteousness,’ with the
blessing® of the good’ righteousness,* (and) with the blessing’ of the good"
Mazda-worshipping” Religion,'° for the worship’? of Nmanya’’ Ratu’ (i.e.
principal master of the house) and for (his) praise.'° We praise”! “Nmanyo”
(i.e. the chief Lord of the house)” the holy,'? Lord”® of holiness.’

(7) We worship*? Sraosha (yazata)* the holy,” the Lord” of
righteousness,** (who is) of good appearance,™ victorious,” bringing
prosperity to the world” (and) righteousness.*7 We worship* the just?
Rashnu (yazata).*! We worship*’ Astad (yazata), the promoter and the
increaser of the world.*°

(8) Thwam atarem Ahurahe Mazdao puthrem ashavanem ashahe
ratim yazamaide; hadha-zaothrem hadha-aiwyaonghanem  imat
baresma ashaya frastaretem, ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
Apam Naptarem yazamaide; Nairim Sanghem yazamaide; takhmem
Damodish upamanem yazatem yazamaide; iristanadm urvand yazamaide


--- Page 89 ---

USHAHEN GAH 73

yao ashaonaim fravashayd. (9) Ratim berezantem yazamaide yim
Ahurem Mazdam, yo ashahe apanotemd, yO ashahe jaghmishtem6;
vispa sravao Zarathushtri yazamaide, vispacha hvarshta shyaothna
yazamaide varshtacha vareshyamnacha."

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaetha ashat hatha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

Yatha Ahi Vairy6.(2)

(10) Yasnemcha! vahmemcha’? aojascha? zavarecha* 4frinami*®
Sraoshahe® ashyehe’ ashivatd® verethrajano’ fradat-gaéthahe,!°
Rashnaosh" razishtahe,” Arshtatascha’ fradat-gaéthayao’ varedat-
gaéthaydo.'5 Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha, Hazanghrem, Jasa me avangha Mazda, Kerfeh
Mozd.

(10) I praise,° worship,’ the Srosh (Yazata), glory,” vivacity* and strength’
of the holy,’ righteous and victorious’ Srosh (Yazata) bringing prosperity to
the world,'° of the just;!? Rashna (yazata)'! and Astad (yazata),'* the furtherer
(promoter)'* and increaser of the world."

PATET (AVESTA)
Kshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Yatha Ahi Vairyo. 5. Yatha Ahi Vairyd panj Az hama gunah patet
pashemaénum, az harvastin dushmata dushukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa
geti manid, pishe-shuma vehan, manashni gavashni kunashni, tant
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pashem4n pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom.* Yatha Ahi Vairyd. 5. Ashem Voha 3.

Fravarane mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Sraoshahe ashyehe,
takhmahe, tanu-manthrahe, darshi-draosh, ahiiryehe, khshnaothra
yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha. Yatha Ahi
Vairyd Zaota fra me mrite, atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava
vidhvao mraoti. Yatha Ahu Vairyé 1."

Frastuye humatdibyascha hikhtoibyascha —hvarshtdibyascha
manthwoibyascha vakhedhvoibyascha varshtvoibyascha. Aibigairya
daithe vispa humatacha hikhtacha hvarshtacha. Paitirichya daithe
vispa dushmatacha dushikhtacha duzhvarshtacha. Fera ve rahi,

ir For the translation of paragraphs 8-9, see Havan Gah, above.
is For its translation, see beginning part of Srosh Baz, above.

it For its translation, see Srosh Baz, above.


--- Page 90 ---

74 KHORDEH AVESTA

Amesha Spenté, yasnemcha vahmemcha, fera manangha, fera
vachangha, fera shyaothna, fera anghuya, fera tanvaschit, khvakhyao
‘ushtanem. Staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohi 1.

Yatha Ahu Vairyo 21, Ashem Vohi 12, Yatha Ahu Vairyd 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami, sraoshahe
ashyehe, takhmahe, tanu-manthrahe, darshi-draosh, ahuiryehe. Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha: Hazanghrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

PATET PASHEMANI

'"Yatha Ahu Vairyé 1. Yatha Ahu Vairyo! panj? az hama gunah’ patet
pashemanum‘*, az> harvastin® dushmata’ duzhukhta® duzhvarshta’,
mem” pa geti'! manid”, pishe'? shuma"™ vehan's, manashni’* gavashni"”
kunashni® tani” ravan?” get?’ mindani’, okhe® awakhsh pasheman”
pa se gavashni’> pa patet hom”. Yatha Ahu Vairyo 5, Ashem Vohii 3.

Fravarané mazdayasno Zarathushtrish, vidaévo Ahura-tkaesho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Sraoshahe ashyehe,
takhmahe tanu-manthrahe, darshi-draosh, ahiiryehe, khshnaothra
yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha. Yatha Ahi
VairyO zaota fra me mrite, atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava
vidhvao mraotu. Yatha Ahi Vairyo 1.

(The person who atones for his sins speaks):-

O good" (religious high-priests!) I, in your'* “presence? (having recited)

five? Yatha Ahi Vairy' repent* (of all sins) by means of Patet*. From’ all®
wicked thoughts’, words® (and) deeds’ which I'° have thought in my mind’?
in this world" (and) from all kinds of sins’, pertaining to thought'®, word"’,
and deed'’, pertaining to (my own) body'’, and soul”, pertaining to this
world?', and the world beyond”, O Hormazd**! I abstain from them with
repentance™ (and) with the three words” (i.e. with thought, word, and deed)
I repent”.

(Kardah 1) Faraz setaem' harvespa? humata’ hukhta‘ hvarshta’*, pa®
manashne’ gavashne’, kunashne’. Awaz setaem" harvespa'' dushmata”

iu For the translation of Ferastuye, see Khorshed Nyayesh, pages above.

iv This whole Patet is in Pazend language. Of these some subject matters are taken from Avesta
and some from Pahlavi Books.

iw From this it appears that the sinner confesses his own sins and makes suitable atonement in
the presence of the High-priests fully-versed in the Zoroastrian Religion. After the composition
of this Patet even from the Persian Rivayets written in later times similar writing is found, that a
sinful person should confess his sins and atone in presence of the just, learned, well-versed per-
son in Religion, in Dastur, of that period.


--- Page 91 ---

PATET PASHEMANI 75

duzhukhta’ duzhvarshta™, az'* manashne'’’ gavashne’’ kunashne'.
Avargirashni dehom” harvespa” humata?' hukhta” hvarshta*, pa™
manashne* gavashne* kunashne”’ ku? kerfeh” kunam*, Behelashni
dehom*! harvespa* dushmata*® duzhukhta** duzhvarshta®*®  az**
manashne*’ gavashne* kunashne”, ku“’ gunah*' nakunam”®.

I praise’ all* good thoughts’, good words* (and) good deeds* through (my)
meditation’, speech® and action’. I abhor’? all'' evil thoughts”, evil words’?
and evil deeds" by'® (my) thoughts'®, words!’, and deeds'®. I hold fast'? (i.e. I
acquire) all” good thoughts”', words” and deeds** through” (my) thoughts”,
words”, and deeds’’, so that** (I) may perform*’ meritorious deeds”. I
relinquish”! all’? evil thoughts* evil words* and evil deeds** through** (my)

thoughts*’, words** and deeds* so that*® (I) may not commit® sin*’.

Faraz® oy shuma“ rad hom*, ke* amshaspand“’ hed*, yazashne” o0*°
nyaeshne*; faraz* pa manashne® faraz* pa“ gavashne™, faraz* pa
kunashne*’, faraz* pa® oh, faraz* pa® tan, faraz*® pa? anech® in™
khesh® jan, tan” o® jan® nam” ravan”'. Bin” bar” khasta”™ im hast”,
pa” kheshiye” yazdan™ dar hom.” Pa* kheshiye*! yazdan® dashtan ae
bahod™ ku® agar* tash®’ azan rasad*, ke in tan® ravanra” be-awayad
dadan*! be-deham”.

I dedicate* unto you“ (who“ are“) the Ameshaspand“’ the Yasna’’ and*°
Nyayesh* with*(my) thought*, word*, and deed*’, with** (my own)
conscience”, body*', (and) through® (this®? which® is) my own®, life® and
through” the body’ and life® i.e. soul’. I keep” the internal” (and) the
external” treasure” which I have”, owing to’ (due to my) kinship” with
God”. Keeping* with® the kinship*! of God® (is this* that*’,) i.e. iff any
thing®*’ happens*, I shall give*’, dedicate?', if necessary, this (my) body® for
the sake of (my) soul”.

Explanation:- (Its significance is, if it is necessary to dedicate my body
for the benefits of my soul, I do so.)

Setayem® ashahi* pahlom*, nagunam*” devan’’. Pa nikiye dadar
Hormazd® sepasdar hom”. Pa petyar'” anai' az? ghanaminod? awar
mad‘, umede rastakhizra*> padash® khorsand’ hamdastan* hom’. Dine
Hormazd" dade Zartosht", rastae fararun”, kard poryodakeshan" pa
dastar'! dar hom'’, An jadehra'® az gunah'’ pa patet hom’® pa patet
hom” az gunah”.

I praise® the best” righteousness™ (and) I smite®® the demons” for the
sake of or in the hope of the *“Resurrection®, I am grateful” and contented

ix For full explanation on “Ristakhez’, see “Zarthoshti Abhyas” written by Sheth K.R. Cama,
pages 288-302.

iy i.e. 1am most grateful to the Creator for whatever excellences reach me every time from Him
(Hormazd).


--- Page 92 ---

76 KHORDEH AVESTA

with the goodness of the creator Hormazd”*, and harm (and unanimous of)
the antagonism'” and harm! which have come‘ (upon me) from? Ahriman.?

Explanation:- (As regards the last sentence mentioned above in the
Pahlavi commentary it is stated that on the day of Resurrection the power of
the Ahriman, and his associates the devs and drujas, will be annihilated and
they cannot bring any kind of harm.)

I keep! (I observe) the Religion of Hormazd'’, the Law of Zartosht",
(good) truthfulness’? (and the excellent) deeds of the “Poryotkaeshas® in
accordance with the commandments of the Religion".

Explanation:- (I will live my life according to the Religion of Hormazd,
all the commandments of the Holy Zartosht and the virtuous acts of the
Poryotkaeshas, i.e. the believers in one God, prior to the time of that
Prophet.)

For that way'® (i.e. if I have deviated from the above mentioned
commandments) I repent (those) sins'’ and I am penitent’? of (these) sins."

(Kardah 2) Ku' marduman’ o bin’ shayad biidan‘ yao man‘ o bin*®
bid ested’, pesh® oy cheher anda, pas" oy cheher pesh", yadshan andar”
jast ested’, az sé sraoshd-charanam gunah", az an nitim gunah", anda

azaran hazar margarzan” and chand geos ast shayad biudan a
h h '6 and chand h!’ hast shayad bidan"’,
name chesht”, harvespa”’ dushmata”! duzhikhta” duzhvarshta”*, mem
parade kasanra*, yav kasan?’ parae manra’”, yav” gunahkarl pa
manra*' kasO gunah*”, o bin bid ested*’, az* 4n gunah* manashni®
gavashni’’ kunashn?* tani’ ravani’ gett’ minoant”, okhe*® awakhsh
pasheman“ pa sé gavashni* pa patet hom“; pa patet hom” az gunah*®.

(From all sins) which’ might originate* (by) from men? (from the very
birth), (if) such (sins) from the beginning® have been committed’ by me? like
others, and of these (sins) if there are (in the early life) few’ in the beginning*®
(and) had more’ in the end'® (in their life), from the sin'* worthy of
punishment with strokes", (rather) from the sin (even) less than that'* up to
one thousand times one thousand of the “margarzan” (sins)'® (and the sin)
even more than so much measure”’ (if) perchance has been committed (by
me)'® - specially,'° all’® evil thoughts”', evil words” (and) evil deeds*? which
I* (may have committed) for the sake of others”, or® (may have been
committed) by others?’ for my sake’, or? by any sinful person* for my
sake*! some minor sin” even, may have originated* - from (all above
mentioned) sins* pertaining to thought*®, word*’, deed**, (my own) body”,
(my own) soul*’, — pertaining to this world*!, or the yonder world”, - from**

iz i.e. the believers in one Good, prior to the time of the Prophet.

ja The significance of this entire first Kardah - chapter, rather some portion, word by word,
agrees with in “Ferastuye” prayer which is known by “Avestan Patet’”. For the text of Ferastuye
and for its translation, see pages 27-28.


--- Page 93 ---

PATET PASHEMANI 77

these sins (of all kinds)**, O Hormazd! I abstain from them with renuncia-
tion with three words (i.e. thought, word and deed) and repent*’ and
become penitent*’ for them.

(Kardah 3) In! and? akho*® paye* gunah* nam‘; chun’ handarakht’,
mediosast’, andarazfarman”, boediozad"', kaediozad”, agerept gunah®,
avavaresht gunah" aredush gunah", khorahe gunah'’, bazae gunah”,
yatu gunah", tanvalgan gunah”, margarzan gunah”, avasosh geran
gunah”', jehmarz gunah”, dashtanmarz gunah*, kunmarz gunah”,
awarun marzashni”, shoethra gunah” seshni’, gunahe ravani’’, gunah
hamimalan”, gunahio pulshahod”, vakhshe vakhshan vakhshe gunah”,
gunah az gunah*' avareakho gunah*?, ku mardum* o bin shayad
bidan* gajasteh* ghanamino* darvand*’ pa petyare daman-e*
Hormazd faraz karnid®.

The sins of worse? degrees (or origin)* are:-

Namely’, to harm someone by (doing) injustice and to interfere in his
good work’, to admonish some one falsely, to tell utter lies and to point out a
wrong path’; - not to act or to act contrary to the will made by any person at
the time of his death or while going on a journey to a foreign country, in
favour of his children or some other persons,’° - to steal human beings or
cattle and to sell them, to spoil a set of good clothes and to spoil purposely
pure and tasty edibles'', not to nourish the poor and the needy in spite of
being rich and prosperous, instead cause affliction and harm them and to
keep the beneficent animals under his control hungry and to strike them, ’* —
to hold a weapon in hands in order to smite or wound someone’? — or to
brandish it on the head of a person opposite him'*, the sin of inflicting a
wound on a person which heals after three'> to four days,'® the sin of
inflicting a wound on hand", — or foot'’, — the sin of inflicting a wound in
such a way as to render the foot lame and to prevent it from doing work!’ —
the sin deserving the punishment of ‘death - the sin of practising derision
or mockery of anyone beyond limit?! - the sin of having physical relations
with a prostitute’ or with a woman in menses™, the sin of committing
unnatural intercourse with a man, or woman” - the sin of formation with a

jb A long commentary in Pahlavi is given about the sins. A list of various types of sins which
come within the purview of this greatest punishment, is given as follows:- Not to regard the Cre-
ator Hormazd as peerless: Not to recognise Zartosht as a genuine prophet and the good Mazda-
worshipping Religion as true: Not to obey the commands of father, mother and teacher, but on
the contrary, to inflict pain on them: To learn witchcraft: to practise heresy: to throw nasa (dead
matter) in water and fire and to bury nasa under the earth: to extinguish the Fire Varharan: to de-
prive possessions and property of any person, deposited for safety with a lawyer and to consume
them after the death of the person, instead of giving to his progeny and descendants: to behave
immorally with a strange woman: to accept the religion of the wicked (or wicked person); for
inflicting false accusation on a holy and pious man or a Dastur, or a chief to give false evidence
against them; to procure abortion; to eat dead matter with drugs and medicine or to cause them
to be consumed by others: to practise heretical deeds being a dastur or a mobed.


--- Page 94 ---

78 KHORDEH AVESTA

woman unlawfully” - the sin of destroying sperm by one’s own hands” - the
sin of sexual intercourse with a woman of another faith,”’ the sin of criminal
intimacy with another person’s wife and of stealing property of another
person’’ - and such other sins as not performing the compulsory meritorious
deeds enjoined in the Zoroastrian Religion, which cause difficulty in
crossing the Chinvat Bridge after death??‘*

isin growing and growing more? — from one sin to another brought into
existence*! — (and) other worse sins*? which can originate** with men’ (i.e.
from the birth) (and the sins) promised** or originated by the accursed’,
wicked*’ Ahreman (evil spirit)*° for® (the “antagonising**) the creatures of
the Creator Hormazd (i.e. for harming them).

Hormazd Khodae*” gunah andar din® peda bekard®, gohane
poryotkeshan“ gunah dashteh ested**. Manashni* peshe’ dadar
Hormazd® mindyan®” getiyan*’ mahest*' peshe’ Amshaspandan*,
peshe* Meher Sarosh*®’ Rashna*’, peshe® atash*® barsam® hom‘,
peshe® din® ravane khesh“, peshe® rad® dastire®’’ dini*, peshe® oy
gaveh” mad ested”, az an gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pashem4n pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom; pa patet hom az gunah.

The Lord Hormazd* (of the entire world) has manifested* (all the above
mentioned) sins*! in the Religion”, and the faithful of the Poryotkaeshas™
(i.e. the good Poryotkeshas) (too) have acknowledged* (them) as sins. (I
repent with atonement all those above mentioned sins)*! with (my good)
thought** before’, (in the presence) of the Creator Hormazd*, (who is) the
greatest”! of the spiritual world” (and) of this world®’, before” the
Ameshaspand™, (the Yazatas) Meher*’, Srosh*® (and) Rashna?’, before** the
Fire’, Baresman® (and) Hom*', before® the Religion® and my (own) soul™,
before® the leader® (and) the Dastur®’ of the Religion®, (and) before” any
good (i.e. pious) “person” (who) (has come)”! is present. (I repent, atone all
the above mentioned sins and recite patet in humiliation).'®

(Kardah 4) Andar! ped? mad? khoh‘ berad’, zan° farzand’, shiy®

jc In the Pahlavi Commentary, five principal duties are mentioned regarding this they are (1) the
consecration of Six Gahambars of the year, or the participation in them according to one’s own
means; (2) celebration of the Fravartikan; (3) participation in the celebration of Rapithwan; (4)
Observance of the Rozgar” of one’s dead parents and relatives, i.e. to consecrate yazishna, baz,
dron, and Afrinagan in their honour on the day and the month on which they departed; and (5) to
perform daily prayers.

jd i.e. not to atone for the sins after having committed once, rather to commit sins continually.
je For its explanation, see note given on Hormuzd Khoday prayer above.

jf i.e. in the absence of the Religious Leader or Dastur, the confession of sins can be made also
in the presence of any person righteous and well-versed in the Zoroastrian Religion.

jg See translation at the end of the second Kardah above.


--- Page 95 ---

PATET PASHEMANI 79

salar’, khesh” nazdik", hamgehaniyan”, hamkhvastagan",
hamsayegan"™, hamshahriyan’, pa irmanian'® jast pa har adadia”,
chun’ man’ andar gunehgar bid ested hom”, az 4n gunah manashni
gavashni kunashni, tani ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman
pa sé gavashni pa patet hom; pa patet hom az gunah.

If'® I’? have been a sinner”? against (or with') (my) father’, mother’,
sister*, brother’, with! (my) “wife%(or) husband’, with! (my) children’ (and)
leader? (i.e. leader of the Religion), with the relatives'® and near ones'’, or
with’ those living in one and the same place’, with' the partners’,
neighbours", inhabitants of the same city'’, use (my) servitors'® - through
deviation (negligence) of ‘justice!’, (I repent for the sins mentioned above
with renunciation).

(Kardah 5) Heher! nasa? khoreshni’, heher* nasa* joeshni® heher’
nasa® oy’? av’ o"! atash” bordan', ya avs o' atash'’ heher'® nasa!”
bordan™, avesta”! pa chamishn” nagoftan*, mdy™% nakhun*® dandan
faresh”’, daste shavin”’, 0?* avare” harche*padar heher nasa*!. chun”
man* andar™ gunehgar bud ested hom*, az 4n gunah manashni
gavashni kunashni, tani ravani get! mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman
pa sé gavashni pa patet hom; pa patet hom az gunah.!!

If! I have become* a sinner* of eating (or the act of eating) dry or
used? “dead matter, to defiling® the dry or wet* dead matters® carrying’? it to
water’? and! fire’ or'* of carrying the water and fire (near) the dry dead
matter'®. Not reciting’ (the Holy) Avesta”! not “abstaining from the hair,”
nails*> and toothpick?®, "using the dirt soiled hands”’ (or anything without
being cleansed with nirang or with water)*’ and** (by being defiled) by™
other’ (things regarded) as dry dead matter or wet dead matter, "I repent

jh It is understood that the reciter of the Patet may be a man or a woman.

jiie. by treating unlawfully in any way with the above mentioned persons or by exercising op-
pression on them.

jj See the translation at the end of the second Kardah above.

jk Hair and nails removed from the body of a living person are called “heher” or dry dead mat -
ter. In Avesta it is called “hikhra”. The entire body of the dead or any part of it is called “dead

matter” or “wet dead matter”. The original meaning of “Nasa” is “corpse”, “carrion”, “contam-
inated thing.” The word is derived from root nas (Sanskrit nash - to destroy).

jl In the Pahlavi commentary.
jm In the Pahlavi commentary: i.e. not to bury lawfully in the earth.

jn The matter contained in this fifth kardah is also found in Avesta itself. In Vendidad, to eat
dead matter or to throw it in water or in fire is strictly forbidden. The person performing such an
act is regarded as impure till the end of his life. Never throw dry dead matter (nas4) in water or
in fire: not only that but if we notice it fallen in water or in fire, it should betaken out immedi-
ately, (see Vendidad fargard VI, paras 26-29; frakart VII, paras 23-27; frakart VIII, paras 73-82).
After removing hair or nail from the body, they are not to be scattered but they are to be buried
in a separate place after digging a pit. (For further details, see Vendidad fargard XVII).


--- Page 96 ---

80 KHORDEH AVESTA

with contrition.

(Kardah 6) Ku kame Dadar Hormazd bid’, oyem 4wayast manidan’,
oyem namanid’; oyem awayast goftan‘ oyem nagoft®: oyem Awayast
kardan‘’, oyem na kard’; az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom; pa patet hom az gunah.!°

I repent and renounce for not thinking about the wish of the Creator
Ahura Mazda’, as I ought to have thought’, for not speaking about? as I ought
to have spoken’ and for not doing as I ought to have done’.

(Kardah 7) Ku kame ahreman bud!, oyem na-dvayast manidan?,
oyem manid’; oyem na-awayast goftan‘*, oyem goft®; oyem na-awayast
kardan®, oyem kard’: az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom; pa patet hom az gunah.

I ought not to have thought according to” the wish of Ahriman and yet I
have thought of*: I ought not to have spoken‘ and yet I have spoken? and I
ought not to have done® and yet I have done’! repent for all these sins with
penitence.

(Kardah 8) Az' hamoyin’ har Ayin> gunah‘, har dyin’ margarzan‘,
har ayin’ farod mand’, har ayin? manid", har ayin gunah az gunah",
oyem” andar’, Hormazd'’ mardum'*, mardum sardagan’® jast'’ pa
patet hom".

I repent for'® all types of (and) every kind’ of sins*, every kind* of
Margarzan’ (i.e. sins worthy of the punishment of death), every kind’ (of sin)
confirmed’, every kind’ of sin left unatoned for’? (i.e. unexpiated) (and)
every kind (of sin arising) out of (another) sin'' which may have been
committed’’ by me’’ against!? (the Creator) Hormazd" (and against) men!°
(and various) kinds of men’®.

(ii) Az’? hamoyin” har ayin”' gunah”, har ayin® margarzan™, har
ayin® farod mand”, har ayin?”? manid”, har ayin gunah az gunah”,
oyem*”’ andar Bahman® gao gospand*®, gospand sardagan™ jast®* pa
patet hom*.

I repent for?’ all types” of (and) every kind?! of sins”, every kind” of
Margarzan™ (sin), every kind”’ of sin confirmed”, every kind of sin?’ left”*®
unatoned for (i.e. unexpiated), (and) every kind (of sin arising) out of
(another) sin’? which may have been committed** by me* against?! Behman*
(Amshaspand)”, the !"cattle** and (various) kinds of cattle**.

jo See the translation at the end of the second kardah.

jp The significance of the sins committed against cattle is that they have been treated with
cruelty. And when they were under our control, they were not treated properly with nourishment


--- Page 97 ---

PATET PASHEMANI 81

(iii) Az*’ hamoyin*® har ayin® gunah* har ayin*! margarzan®”, har
ayin® farod mand“, har ayin*® manid“, har ayin gunah az gunah”,
oyem*® andar” Ardibehesht™, atash*', atash sardagan™ jast*, pa patet
hom™.

I repent for all types*® of, (and) every kind*’ of sins*, every kind*! of
Margarzan (sin)”, every kind* (of sin) confirmed”, (and) every kind* (of sin
arising) out of (another) sin‘” left unatoned” (i.e. unexpiated), which may
have been committed by me“ against” Ardibehesht*® (Ameshaspand),
‘9fire*! and (various) kinds of fire.

Az® hamoyin® har ayin’’ gunah**, har ayin® margarzan® har ayin®!
farod mand® har ayin manid™“, har dyin gunah az gunah®, oyem®
andar” Shehrevar®, ayokhshast®, ayokhshast sardagan” jast”, pa patet
hom”.

I repent” for all types*® of (and), every kind*’ of sins**, every kind of

Margarzan (sin), every kind” (of sin) confirmed”, every kind® (of sin) left
unatoned for, (i.e. unexpiated)™, (and) every kind (of sin arising) out of
(another) sin® which may have been committed” by me® against®’
Sheherevar (Amshaspand)®, “metal®, (and) various kinds of metals”.

(iv) Az? hamoyin” har ayin™ gunah”, har ayin” margarzan”, har
ayin” farod mand*, har Ayin*' manid®, har ayin gunah az gunah*®,
oyem™ andar® Spandarmad® zamin*’ zamin sardagan® jast® pa patet
hom”.

76

I repent” for all types” of’ (and)” every kind” of sins”, every kind of
Margarzan” (sin), every kind (of sin) confirmed*®, every kind (of sin) left
una toned for® (i.e. unexpiated). (and) every kind (of sin arising) out of
(another) sin*’ which may have been committed* by me™ against*
Spandarmad (Amshaspand)**, the ‘earth*’ (and various) kinds of earth®

— fodder and required care.

jq The significance of sins committed against Fire is that it was not kept burning by feeding
fuel, sandalwood, incense from time to time, with care and precaution, but was allowed to extin-
guish or was placed on a dirty and defiled place, or some dry dead matter (nasa) was thrown on
it. A strict prohibitive order as regards this is enjoined in our holy Avesta. Various kinds of Fires
are referred to here, and its significance seems to be an indication about various professional
fires, e.g., fire of the blacksmith, fire of the potter, fire of the factory, fire of the bakers, etc. The
writing about this is given in Vendidad, Fargard VIII, see paragraphs 81-96.

jr The import of the sins committed against metals is this: metallic utensils have to be kept
clean, and not allowed to remain dirty or rusty. Health is spoiled by eating the food kept in dirty
and rusty utensils. If we examine minutely the commandments of the Zoroastrian Religion, its
original aim is to make the world prosperous, by means producing diseases and plagues and tak -
ing care of the health. It is enjoined to keep the health free from unhealthy and to apply suitable
remedies before and after the deterioration takes place. This is ordained to be the most important
duty amongst other duties. By not fulfilling this we stand as sinners in the eyes of the Creator,
Hormazd.


--- Page 98 ---

82 KHORDEH AVESTA

(vi) Az’! hamoyin” har ayin® gunah™, har ayin® margarzan” har
ayin” farod mand”, har dyin” manid', har ayin gunah az gunah' oyem?
andar’ khordad‘, av’, av tokhmagan’, jast’, pa patet hom®.

I repent for all types” of, (and) every kind® of sins”, every kind® of
Margarzan (sin)**, every kind’’ (of sin) confirmed”, every kind” (of sin)
left! unatoned for (i.e. unexpiated), (and) every kind (of sin) arising out of
(another) sin' which may have been committed’ by me’ against? Khordad
(Amshaspand)*‘ the ‘water? (and various) kinds of waters’.

(vii) Az’ hamoyin” har dyin" gunah”, har dyin’? margarzan", har
ayin'S farod mand", har ayin'’’ manid'® har dyin gunah az gunah”
oyem”’ andar”! Amardad” orvar™* orvar sardagan™ jast”*, pa patet
hom”.

I repent’® for all types of'® (and) every kind" of sins'’?, every kind’ of
Margarzan (sin)'*, every kind’> (of sin) confirmed’®, every kind’’ (of sin)
left!’ unatoned for (i.e. unexpiated), (and) every kind (of sin arising) out of
(another) sin'®, which may have been committed** by me” against?!
Amardad™ (Amshaspand), "trees”’ (and various) kinds of trees”.

(viii) Az?” hamoyin” har dyin” gunah*, har ayin*' margarzan*, har
ayin® farod mand*, har ayin* manid*, har ayin gunah az gunah’’,
oyem*® andar?” dame Hormazd*” jast*! chun” satar*, mah* o*
khorshed*, atash”’ sohar* soza”, sag*°, vay*', gospand™ panj ayin*, o*4
avare® gavahe deheshnan*’ in** Hormazd khesh®, chun® andarg™
zamin® o® asman“ chun® man® andar” gunehgar bid ested hom®, az
an gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani ravani geti mimdani, okhe
awakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet hom; pa patet hom az
gunah.

I repent for all types of*’, (and) every kind’ of sins*°, every kind*! of
Margarzan (sin), every kind* (of sin) confirmed*’, every kind** (of sin) left
unatoned for* (i.e. unexpiated), (and) against*? the creatures of Ahura
Mazda”, such as” stars’, the Moon“ and the Sun* (and) against* the red**

js The significance of sins committed against the earth is that it is not tilled after developing it
and kept uncultivated and desolate. By keeping residential place wet and dirty instead of main-
taining it dry and clean as it would lead to deterioration of health. Holes of harmful animals and
noxious creatures should be closed - Because, by keeping the earth within ten single, carelessly,
it (metaphorically) gets annoyed and curses the owner.

jt The significance of the sins committed against water is the water is not to be spoiled by
throwing into it nasa - dry dead matter or any other polluted thing, or to remove the nasa - dry
dead matter if fallen in it, or in any way, the water is not to be kept unclean so that by drinking it
health is spoiled. Various kinds of waters are referred to here and its meaning should be under-
stood as the waters of the spring, waters of the rivers, waters of the well, etc.

ju The significance of the sins committed against trees is: that the trees should not be destroyed
carelessly, they should be allowed to grow with care and labour. So that they produce fruits and
flowers.


--- Page 99 ---

PATET PASHEMANI 83

(and) burning” fire*’, against the dogs*’, birds*! and animals® of five
kinds® and™ against* other? good® creatures*’ between” the earth and®
the sky™, which® (are) Hormazd’s own*.

(Kardah 9) Satarshekasni', khaetodath vasovashn?’?, diidae vehan
vasovashni’, gahambar*, Farvardiyan®, Hom Darun’, hosh_farid’
yazdan* nehad? o'° padiraft", rapithwen fardum”, roze vadardegan'’,
chun" man a4wayast yashtan'> oyem na yasht", az 4n gunah manashni
gavashni kunashni, tani ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman
pa sé gavashni pa patet hom; pa patet hom az gunah.

I repent for destroying adopted sonship (of anyone)', disturbing internal
relations’, destructing a family of the good’ and not consecrating’®
Gahambar’, (on) Fravardegan days*, (not offering) Dron (in honour) of Hom
yazat®, (or other) consecrated (or dedicated) things’ fixed’ for the Yazat
accepted by me’! not consecrating the first “Rapithwan”, the Rozgar
(anniversary) of the departed ones (of the near relatives)'* as'* I ought to
have consecrated’>.

(Kardah 10) Avar-manashni', tar-manashni’, Azurl, pandi‘,
khshmaghan?, arshghani’, vad-chashmr!’, sir-chashmi® vadnagirashn?’,
khordaknagirashni®, nagirai", pandi’’?, khud-shahi®, asgehani",
sapozgari'’, varuni'®*, gomani’’ ashmoi'*, zorgavahi’, darogdavar?’,
ozdist parast?', koshad davarashni”, barhen davarashni*, aymuk
dvarashni“, drayan-joyishni®, drayan-khorishn?’’, duzdi’, gadahr’*,
jahi’, jadui®, jaduparasti', rospr’, rospl barag?, gavahe paeti*,
gavahe vanid?i*> shinmoi*, 0°’ avare** har ayin® gunah”, o pa in pateti"!
hoshmord”, 4n nahoshmord*, an danest*, 4n nadanest*, an angard“,
an na-angard“’, sraoshada verezya* peshe rad dasture dini” dwayast
garzidan™, oem na-garzid*' az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni,
tanI ravani geti mindani okhe awakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa
patet hom; pa patet hom az gunah.

I repent for the pride’, haughtiness* speaking ill of the dead,* avarice,’
getting angry beyond limits,’ practising jealousy,° casting an evil eye on
anyone,’ casting a glance shamelessly,® with ‘“evil intention’, casting a
glance with contempt’®, self-willedness'', being discontented of my own

jv ie. the first day of Rapithwan, which falls in the month Farvardin and roz Hormazd. But our
people have kept the day of consecrating Rapithwan in the month Farvardin, roz Ardibehesht,
because its propitiatory formula — khshnuman - is similar to that of Ardibehesht Roz. The mean-
ing of “Rapithwan” is heat, summer season, middle of the day, noon. The significance of the
Rapithwan Jashan is that the Jashan is performed in honour of the commencement of the Sum-
mer season.

jw Casting an evil eye on a woman or wealth, property of another person (in the Pahlavi com -
mentary).


--- Page 100 ---

84 KHORDEH AVESTA

condition”, acting according to my own will only’, slothfulness™,
scandalousness'*, revenge'®, “distrust—doubt'’, “heresy'®, giving false
evidence”’, delivering false judgement”, idol-worship”’, running to and fro
without tying kusti - (the sacred girdle on the sacred shirt*’,) running about
naked™, moving with a shoe in one foot and with another foot bare, saying
grace (big) at the time of meals and thereafter vitiating it by speaking
audibly**, partaking of the meal without saying grace?®, theft?’, “robbery’’,
whoredom”, magic or uttering spells of the demons*’, worship of
witchcraft*', prostitution’, whorishness®*, permitting unnatural intercourse
with oneself, performing unnatural intercourse with others*, weeping
loudly after the departed ones and lamenting beyond limit**, and*’ (besides
these) other*® sins*° of every kind’, which have been remembered* in this
Patet*’, the sins which are not enumerated*, the sins which have been
known“ (by me) (and) the sins which are not known (by me)*, the sins
about which I have thought** and the sins about which I have not thought’,
and have not been atoned (expiated)*' by me (with regret) as they ought to
have been (atoned) with submission and regret (i.e. with confession)” before
the leader of the religion (and) the Dastur”’.

(Kardaéh 11) Ku agar! kasan’? pateti padirafteh hom‘, oyem
nakardeh hom‘, ishan ravanra dushkharih’ mad. Yadshan* zadehra°,
har yak’ jud judra", manashni gavashni kunashni, tani ravani geti
minoani, okhe awakhsh pashem4an pa sé gavashni pa patet hom; pa
patet hom az gunah.

If' I have accepted‘ (to perform) the Patet* for others’, (and if) I do not
perform it’ whereby distress’ (or difficulty’) come upon® their souls® (and)
their children’, (then) for (the distress or difficulty (caused to) each person",
individually", (I repent).

(Kardah 12) Pa! an’ din’ dastir* est hom’, in‘ Hormazd’ Zartosht®
chasht’, Zartosht" oy Goshtasp". Pa payvand” Adarbad Maraspandan®
mad'*, Padash'> pasakht'® kard bokht'’. Ashahi'® veh” ravane”’
dusharamra”' awayeshnitar” veheshni hom’.

(1) remain steadfast on' the commandments’ of that? Religion’, which®
(the Creator) Hormazd’ tasted? (i.e. taught) to (Holy) Zartosht® (and the
Holy) Zartosht'® in turn (taught) (it to King) Gushtasp''. From the families’?

jx Not obeying the commands of the teacher, Dastur and parents (in the Pahlavi commentary).

jy Causing heart-burning, i.e. to bewail in mind on seeing the good condition of others (in the
Pahlavi commentary).

jz to cast a doubt on what one says and does himself (in the Pahlavi commentary).

ka To blaspheme the Creator Hormazd, the Prophet Holy Zartosht and the good Mazda-worship -
ping Zoroastrian Religion and to wish ill of them, to cause discord amongst men and to interpret
falsely the meaning of Avesta intentionally (in the Pahlavi commentary).

kb Of the women who procure abortion (in the Pahlavi commentary).


--- Page 101 ---

PATET PASHEMANI 85

(of the Prophet Zartosht and King Gushtasp), Adarbad Maraspand'?
descended'*. He’* embellished'® and purified'’ (the Religion of Zartosht) (i.e.
brought it into original present form.

Explanation: (A learned and erudite Dastur, Adarbad Maraspand
flourished during the reign of king Shapur, son of Hormazd. It is so stated
about him in the Pahlavi commentary that his father had descended from the
family of the Holy Prophet Zartosht and his mother from the family of King
Gushtasp. In order to show the excellence of the good Mazda-worshipping
Religion this Dastur poured on his chest nine maunds of molten brass and
removed doubts and suspicion from the minds of the people about this true
religion.

For the delight”! of (my own) soul” I approve® (or I desire) good’
Righteousness’* more seemly”.

Explanation: (I aspire to acquire righteousness and truthfulness more
than other things as an excellent thing with the purpose that my soul may
achieve salvation after my death, and attain to its delight.)

Pa zivandie jan™* Astuan hom* humata” pa manashne?’, astuan
hom”? hukhta” pa gavashne™, astuan hom*! hvarshta® pakunashne™®,
astuan hom* pa* gavahe* dine mazdayasnan*’, hama*®* kerfeha®
hamdastan hom az‘' hama®” gunahia® jud-dastan hom“. Pa neki*
sepasdar hom*; az anai’’ khorsand hom*. Pul padfarah” band e
darosh™, tojashne*! tavan® din®, padfarahe™ sé shab* panjah haft sal*,
padash*’ khorsand* hamdastan hom”.

I remain steadfast on good thoughts” through (my) thinking good
(thought)’’ till the existence of (my) “life, I remain steadfast”® on good
words”, through (ray) utterance. I remain steadfast*' on good deeds” through
(ray) action**, (and) I remain steadfast** on*> good*® Religion*” of Mazda-
worship*’. I am in agreement* with all** meritorious deeds (or virtuous
deeds)*’; (and) I do not agree“ with"' all” sins*.

Explanation: (I agree with and accept all meritorious deeds, truthfulness,
morality, etc.; and I do not agree with, but hate all wicked deeds, falsehood,
immorality, etc.)

I am thankful* for the goodness* (conferred upon me by the Creator
Hormazd) (and) I am contented* with distress‘.

Explanation: (I am extremely grateful to the Creator Hormazd, for
whatever happiness and good things have reached me through Him and I am
not displeased or grumble for any calamity or distress that may befall me,
but I keep my mind at ease and contented).

(1) am® contented*® and in agreement® with (all) these*’ - retribution at

ke i.e. as long as my life is extant in my body.


--- Page 102 ---

86 KHORDEH AVESTA

the (Chinvat) “Bridge”, severe fetters®°, atonement*! (and) fine for the
‘*sins**(prescribed by) the religion**, punishment™ of the three nights* (first
after death) (of which every night will be “as long as) fifty-seven years”.

Oem kardeh hom" in® pateti®, guzarg umede kerfehra™, geran bime
duzakhra®. Ashahi veh® ravan dusharamra®’: pa In manashne® kardeh
hom®. Ku kar kerfeh” man” anda ni” kard”, anche” ni*® kunam”,
hama” estashne kerfehra”, guzarashne gunahra”, bokhta ravanra*.
Agar®! mandeh bahod®, ku gunahe man*® tokht nabahod™, padfarah® e
sé shab* anahia®’ padash* khorsand® hamdastan hom”.

I say®' this® Patet® repent with the hope of gaining Heaven for ray
meritorious deeds™, (and) am shaken for the sake of the immense dread of
hell®, (and) for the “sake of righteousness® (which is) the delight of (my)
soul®’. With this intent! have made® (this Patet). Whatever meritorious
deeds”’1 have hitherto” done” (and) do” at present” (are) for maintaining
them permanently and for wiping off of the sins” for the salvation of my
soul®. If’! any of my sins (remain unatoned)*”, (and) if I* am not yet
absolved from them™, (then) I am contented® and in agreement” with the
punishment* of (the first) three nights (after my death)** for committing
them*’.

Hame farmaem®! Ashem Vohi” vegudirashni’’, pateti’* pesh az
begudirashn?’®: pas gudardeh man*’, man zadehra”’ az gunah” pa patet
bahod”. Sedosh'™ getofrid' farmayad? farmudar’ khaheshni‘ hamdastan
hom’; Hormazd khesh® hom’, Hormazd dahmani kunam!', ashahi’
sataem".

I order*! (to recite) Ashem Vohii (for me) at the time of (my) passing
away”? (and to recite) the Patet™ prior to death®, (and) after my demise”; my
children’ should perform Patet” (repentance) for (my) sins®*’, and should
order? (to perform “"Srosh'” (and) Getikharid! (in my name).

kd For its explanation see below, note on Sedosh.

ke i.e. whatever atonement and punishment is to be borne for not acting according to the orders
of the Religion.

kf In the Pahlavi commentary, for the explanation about this, see my Yasht Ba Maeni, Hadokht
Nask, Fargard III.

kg i.e. whereby my life be pleased by doing truthful and virtuous deeds.

kh i.e. the yazishn in honour of Srosh for three days. According to the Religion of Zarathushtra,
for three days after the death of a person, the soul hovers about the same place where the body
was laid after necessary ceremonies and on the dawn of the fourth day after death, it goes to-
wards the Chinvat Bridge. For these three days the soul remains under the protection of Holy
Srosh yazata it is enjoyed: therefore, to consecrate the yasna with the Khshnuinan of Srosh for
the dead person. For these three days the soul remembers all good or wicked deeds performed
during his lifetime, and thinks of the place he will get in the next world. To the soul of the right-
eous man immense joy arises in the hope of gaining the reward of his goodness during that peri-
od and the soul of the wicked gets frightened with fear of being punished for his wicked actions.


--- Page 103 ---

PATET PASHEMANI 87

“T am$ the director’, the desirer* (of it) (and its) approver? (for performing
that Patet and Srosh “Getikharid). I am’ the relative of Hormazd® (i.e.
through the Creator Hormazd), (and) I regard Hormazd as the Most Pious*: I
praise’® righteousness’.

Oem gerafteh hom" harvespa” humata’ hikhta’ hvarshta'’, pa
manashni'® gavashni’’ kunashni'*. Be-helashni dehom’ harvespa”’
dushmata”' duzhukhta” duzhvarshta*, az manashni* gavashni’*
kunashn?’®. Oem gerafteh hom harvespa humata hikhta hvarshta, pa
manashni gavashni kunashni. Behelashnt dehom harvespa dushmata
dizhukhta duzhvarshta, az manashni gavashni kunashni. Oem gerafteh
hom harvespa humata hikhta hvarshta, pa manashni gavashni
kunashni. Behelashni dehom_ harvespa dushmata_  duzhikhta
duzhvarshta, az manashni gavashni kunashni.““

I have taken hold” of all'? good thoughts’, good words’* (and) good
deeds'> with (my) thought’®, word'’ and action'’. I renounce’® all evil
thoughts’, evil words” and evil deeds? with (my) thought™, speech” and
action’®.

Oem gerafteh hom! harvespa? rahe’ rast fararun‘; behelashni
dehom® harvespa’ rahe® arast? awarun': ghana" shekast’?, Hormazd
behawziin"; staomi'S Ashem’*. Ashem Vohi 1.

I have taken hold' (followed) of all* just* and virtuous® paths’: I renounce®
all’ false? and wicked'® paths’. (May) Ghanamino" (i.e. Ahreman) (be)
annihilated’; (the Creator) Hormazd’* (is) the increaser of goodness'*; I
praise!’ Righteousness’®.

Ferastuye humatodibyascha hikhtodibyascha hvarshtodibyascha,
manthwoibyascha vakhedwoibyascha varshtvoibyascha. Aibigairya

On the dawn of the fourth day the soul goes towards the Chinvat Bridge, where Meher yazata,
Srosh yazata and Rashna yazata, the most just, assign to him the proper place (Heaven, Purgat-
ory or Hell) after weighing all the deeds done in this world. For further details about this, see
my translation of Vendidad 19 fargard, paras 27-32 and its explanation; and my Yasht Ba Mdeni,
Yasht 22.

ki i.e. on these three ceremonies I have my full faith, and I order to perform them in my name
after my death.

kj Getikharid. The original meaning of the word getikharid is “to purchase this world”, i.e. to
acquire meritorious deeds from this world, so that after death the soul may get happiness and
comfort. But generally to have performed this act of getikharid, means to consecrate the yasna
in honour of the soul of the dead for nine days. Like the Zindeh-rav4n ceremony this ceremony
can also be performed for living persons. We find such a writing in the later books on the
Zoroastrian Religion.

=

kk If anyone recites the Patet for the dead person, the words falan “jadehra” may be added after
each “hvarsht” and “duzhvarsht” words: i.e. the name of the person in whose honour the Patet is
performed should be uttered with “jadehra’”. The original meaning of the word “jadeh” is “open

road” and from that it means “salvation, release”.


--- Page 104 ---

88 KHORDEH AVESTA

daithe, vispa humatacha hikhtacha hvarshtacha. Paitirichya daithe,
vispa dushmatacha duzhikhtacha duzhvarshtacha. Fera ve rahi,
Amesha Spenta, yasnemcha vahmemcha, fera manangha, fera
vachangha, fera shyaothana, fera anghuya, fera tanvaschit khvakhyao
ushtanem; staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohi 1."

Yatha Ahi VairyO 21: Ashem Vohi 12: Yatha Ahi Vairyod 2.
Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami, Sraoshahe
ashyehe, takhmahe, tanu-manthrahe, darshi-draosh, ahiiryehe. Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me Avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

HOMAGE UNTO A LAMP

‘™Pa name yazdan Hormazd Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh
awazayad; Atash Dadgah Adar fara. Az hama gunah_patet
pashemaénum: az harvastin dushmata duzhikhta, duzvarshta mem pa
geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n
gunah, manashni gavashni kunashni, tani ravani geti mindani, okhe
awakhsh pashem§an pa sé gavashni pa patet hom.

Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdfo (recite bowing the head) nemase-te

Atarsh Mazdao Ahurahe hudhao mazishta yazata. Ashem Vohi 1. (recite
three times).

Ahmiai raéshcha: Hazanghrem: Jasa me Avanghe Mazda: Kerfeh
Mozd.

HOMAGE UNTO FRAVARTIKAN

Az hama gunah' patet pashemanum?’. Ashaunam’ vanguhish‘ siirao*
spentao® fravashay0’ yazamaide®. Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1. (to recite three
times).

Ahmiai raéshcha: Hazanghrem: Jasa me Avanghe Mazda: Kerfeh
Mozd.

Of all sins' I repent through penitence’. We worship® (or remember) the
good’, heroic® (and) prosperity-increasing® Fravashis’ of the righteous
(people)’.

kl For the translation of this paragraph, see Khorshed Nyayesh, above.

km This entire Homage is taken from the initial portion of Atash Nyayesh: for its translation, see
at that place.


--- Page 105 ---

HOMAGE UNTO DAKHMA - TOWER OF SILENCE 89

HOMAGE UNTO DAKHMA — TOWER OF SILENCE

Az hama gunah! patet pashemanum~. ““Nemase-te’ idha‘ iristanam®
urvand® yazamaide’ yao’ ashaonam? “fravashayo'. Ashaone Ashem
Vohii 1. (to recite three times).

Ahmiai raéshcha: Hazanghrem: Jasa me Avanghe Mazda: Kerfeh
Mozd.

Of all sins' I repent with contrition’. We here* worship’ the souls® of the
dead° who? are the Fravashis'® of the righteous (people).

HOMAGE UNTO MOUNTAINS

Az hama gunah! patet pashemanum’. "’Vispao*? garayd‘ asha-
khvathrao* pouru-khvathrao® mazdadhata’ ashavana® ashahe’ ratavo"
yazamaide. Ashem Vohii 1. (To recite three times).

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me Avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Of all sins’ I repent with Patet*. We praise'’ all holy’ mountains‘ created
by Hormazd’ (which are) fully comfortable* (spacious) (and) (with fullness)
full of welfare’ (i.e. producers of food) (and) “useful things’ of
righteousness’ (grow there).

HOMAGE UNTO WATERS

Az hama gunah!' patet pashemanum?’. (To recite bowing the head).
Nemase?-te* ashaum® sévishte® Aredvi Sira’ Anahite® ashaone. Ashem
Vohi 1. (To recite three times).

Ahmiai raéshcha: Hazanghrem: Jasa me avanghe Mazda: Kerfeh
Mozd.

Of all sins' I repent with Patet?. Homage’ (be) unto thee*, O holy*, most
beneficent® (and) undefiled® Ardvi Sura’!

HOMAGE UNTO PLANTS
Az hama gunah!' patet pashemanum?’. (To recite bowing the head).

kn There does not seem to be the necessity of the words, “nemase-te” in this place; if by retain-
ing these words on the one hand we attach to “urvan6” or “fravashay6”, then there should occur
“nem6 ve” instead of ““Nemase-te”, because the words “‘nemase-te” are in singular and “nemo

ve” are in plural. Nemo ve = Homage (be) unto you.

=99

ko The words, “idha iristanam urvand yazamaide yao ashaonam fravashayo
yasna Ha 26, para 7.

are taken from

kp This whole sentence is taken from Yasna Ha 6, para 13.

kq For its explanation, see note to Aiwisruthrem Gah verse 5.


--- Page 106 ---

90 KHORDEH AVESTA

Nemo’ urvarayao* vanghuyao> Mazdadhatayao® “ashaonyao’. Ashem
Vohii 1. (To recite three times)

Ahmiai raéshcha: Hazanghrem: Jasa me Avanghe Mazda: Kerfeh
Mozd.

Of all sins' I repent with Patet?. Homage? (be) unto the good? (and) holy’
plants* created by Hormazd°!

BAZ OF RECITING ASHEM VOHU 1200

(Note: This baz should be recited on the first five days of the Fravartikan,
i.e. from Roz 26 Mah 12 to Roz 30 Mah 12).

Pa name yazdan Hormazd Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh awazayad;
Ardafravash berasad. “Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az
harvastin dushmata duzhukhta duzhvarshta; mem pa geti manid, oem
goft, oem kard, oem jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni
gavashni kunashni, tani ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman
pa sé gavashni pa patet hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdio, tardidite
angrahe mainyéush; haithyavarshtam hyat vasna “‘ferashotemem:
staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohii 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévé Ahura-tkaesh6o (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Ahurahe Mazdao°
raévato’ khvarenanguhato®, Ameshanam Spentanam’ ashaunam”? fra-
vashinam" ughranam” aiwithtranam’, paoiryotkaéshanam" fravashi-
nam‘, nabanazdishtanam’® fravashinam”, khshnaothra™® yasnaicha”
vahmaicha” khshnaothraicha”! frasastayatcha” yatha Ahi Vairyd”
zaota™ fra me** mriite’, atha ratush ashatchit hacha”’ fri ashava”®
vidhvao” mraoti*. Ahurem Mazdam*!' raévantem” khvarenanguhan-
tem* yazamaide*; Amesha Spenta* hukhshathra** hudhaongho”
yazamaide*; ashaunam® vanguhish” sirdo*' spentao” fravashayo*
yazamaide™.

(Here 1200 Ashem Vohi are to be recited)

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama_ sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem _behedin
mazdayasnan agahi Astavani neki rasanad; aedun “"bad. (Recite aloud)
kr Also from the Vendidad fargard 19, para 18, we get the “Homage unto Plants” of the same
signification but written differently from the grammatical formation; it is:- Avesta - Nem6!

urvaire’ vanaguhi’ mazdadhate* ashaone*; Ashem Vohii 1. Translation. - Homage’ (be) (unto
thee), O good’, holy® plant* created by Hormazd"!

ks i.e. may the Holy Fravashis come (to this prayer)! This portion is wholly taken from the Kh-
shnuman of Ardafravash A fringan.

kt For its translation, see the translation of Ahura Mazda Khodae, above.

ku For its translation, see Khorshed Nyayesh, page 39.


--- Page 107 ---

BAZ OF RECITING ASHEM VOHU 1200 91

Yatha Ahu Vairy6 2.

Yasnemcha! vahmemcha’, aojascha’ zavarecha‘ afrinami*, Ahurahe
Mazdao®% raévato’ khvarenanguhatd*, Ameshanam Spentanam’, asha-
unam” fravashinam" ughranam” aiwithiranam'’; paoirydtkaésha-
nam" fravashinim', nabanazdishtanam’® fravashinam'’’. Ashem Vohi
1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me Avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

I praise’, worship’, adoration’, efficacy? and strength of (the Creator)
Hormazd®, keeper of treasure’ (and) glorious® the Bountiful Immortals’, the
heroic’? (and) triumphant’? Fravashis'! of the righteous (people)'®, the
Fravashis of the Poryotkaeshas", (and) the Fravashis’’ of the next of kin'®.

YAZISHN HA XX known as FRAMRAOT

(Note: This Ha with the baz shown below should be recited on the first
five days of the Fravartikan, i.e. from the Roz 26 Mah 12 to Roz 30 Mah 12).

Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1. Pa name yazdan
Hormazd Khodae awazini gorje khoreh awazayad; Ardafravash
berasad.” Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhikhta duzhvarshta; mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem biin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni tani
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdiao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush:
haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem; staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohii
3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévé Ahura-tkaesh6o (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Ahurahe Mazdao
raevatd khvarenanguhatd Ameshanaim Spentanaim, ashaunam
fravashinam ughranam aiwithiranam, paoiryOtkaéshanam fravashi-
nam, nabanazdishtanam fravashinam, khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmai-
cha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota fra me
mrite, atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti. Ahurem
Mazdam raévantem khvarenanguhantem yazamaide; Amesha Spenta
hukhshathra hudhaonghd yazamaide; Ashaunaim vanguhish surao
spentao fravashayd “yazamaide.

kv In this Ha there occurs the commentary of Ashem Vohii. About this, see pages 1-2; by recit-
ing this well-known prayer called Ashem Vohii at a certain time separately, how much merit that
reciter gains; about this, see my Yasht Ba Maeni, 21" Yasht.

kw May the Holy Fravashis come up (to this Prayer)!

kx For its translation, see Baz of reciting Ashem Vohii 1200, above.


--- Page 108 ---

92 KHORDEH AVESTA

(1) Framraot! Ahurd Mazdao? Ashem Vohi vahishtem asti*, para
ahmai* vohi® vahishtem® chinasti’, yatha® khvaétave? khvaétatem’’:
vohi vahishtem asti!! atha” tkaéshem™ karayeiti'*. (2) Ushta asti ushta
ahmai’’ ushtataitya’’ vispem'’ ashavanem' vispai'? ashaone”’ para-
chinasti?', yathana” staitya** vispem™* ashavanem”* vispai*’ ashaone”’
para-chinasti* (3) Yat ashai vahishtai ashem”, parachinasti*” vispem*!
manthrem” vispem® manthrai*‘, yatha®> ashai* khshathrem*’ chinasti*,
yathacha® zbayente*’ ashaone*! ashem*”  chinasti*, yathacha“
khshmavoya* ashem* chinasti*? yat saoshyantaéibyo*; thrayo”
tkaésha®, Vispem*! vach6” fravakem* haurim*™, vacho6* Ahurahe
Mazdao*,

(4) Mazdao*’ framraot®: chim? fraimradt®; ashavanem®
mainyaomcha® gaéthimcha®. chvans™ framraot® fravakem®, vahishto”
khshayamno®*. chvantem®; ashavanem” vahishtemcha’'  avaso-
khshathremcha”. (5) Baghaim”™ Ashahe vahishtahe’ yazamaide”;
Ashahe vahishtahe” yazamaide” frasraothremcha”, framarethremcha”
fragathremcha® frayashtimcha®*'.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vanghd
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
Yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.
Ashem Vohi 1.

(Note: The portion from “Framraot” up to Ashem Voht | should be
recited seven times. When it is recited the seventh time, Ashem Vohiti need
not be recited).

(1) (The Creator) Hormazd' proclaimed’ (the sacred verse of Ashem
Vohi).

Ashem Vohi Vahistem asti? - (uttering these words, the worshipper)
acknowledges’ for Him‘ (i.e. Hormazd) the highest® good’, as if* he were
accepting’ the kinship'® of his kindred’. Vohu vahishtem “asti!! - (uttering
these words, the worshipper, in a way) puts into practice’ the laws of the
Religion”.

(2) Ushta asti ushta ‘““ahmai’* (in repeating these words the worshipper)
associates”® firmly™ a*° righteous (man)”’ with other righteous (men)”, just
as” a!’ righteous (man)'* “accepts”! happiness! from other!? righteous
(men)”’.

(3) Yat ashai vahishtai "ashem” - (in repeating these words the

ky i.e. Righteousness is the best good (or blessing).
kz i.e. it is happiness, happiness is unto (that) man.
la Its significance is that righteous people mutually share each other’s happiness.

Ib i.e. (the man) who (is) in the cynosure of righteousness.


--- Page 109 ---

YAZISHN HA XX known as FRAMRAOT 93

worshipper, as it were) accepts*® all?! the Holy Spells* for every * (knower)
intelligent person of the Holy Spells*, just as*? he accepts*® sovereignty*’ of
(that) righteousness*®, just as* he accepts® truthfulness” from the righteous
(man)"', and for you*’, the benefactors**. (As stated above) (there are) three”
divisions’ (of Ashem Vohii). Every*! hymn® verse (which is) complete in
itself (the whole™ hymn*) (is) the hymn*> of (the Creator) Hormazd.

(4) (The Creator) Hormazd*’ proclaimed® (the hymn of Ashem Vohi.
Whom* did he proclaim®? (Reply): to the righteous (man)*' belonging to the
spiritual” and the material world®. In what capacity™ did He proclaim® the
hymn® (of that Ashem Vohi)? (Reply): as to the supreme” Rulers’ Whom
(did He proclaim? (Reply): to the righteous and the best “(man)” not acting
according to his own whims”.

(5) We adore the portion of "Asha Vahishta™. Of the Asha Vahishta’’; we
adore” its chanting”, remembrance”, singing-aloud® and glorification®’.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae, awazini mardum mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan oem behedin mazdayasnan
agahi Aastavani neki rasanad; aedin bad. (To recite aloud). Yatha Ahi
vairyo 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami Ahurahe
Mazdao raévatd khvarenanguhatd, Ameshanam Spentan4m, ashaunam
fravashinam ughranam aiwithiranam, paoiryOtkaeshanam fravashi-
nam, nabanazdishtandam fravashinam.” Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me Avanghe Mazda: Kerfeh
Mozd.

BAZ OF RECITING YATHA AHU VAIRYO 1200
'"(Note: This baz should be recited on the Five Gatha Gahambar days.)

Pa name yazdan Hormazd Khodiae awazini, gorje khoreh awazayad:
Geh GathabyO Ahunavad Geh, Ushtavad Geh, Spentomad Geh,
Vohikhshathra Geh, Vahishtoisht Geh, Geh Gathabyo, ardafarvash be-
rasad". Az hama gunah patet pashemanum: az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem

Ic Original meaning “not ruling according to his will”.

Id It appears that there is a reference to the Prophet Holy Zarathushtra.

le Prayer called Asha Vahishta should be understood as Ashem Vohi.

If For the translation of this para, see “Baz of reciting Ashem Vohii 1200”.

ao”?

lg The khshnuman - or the propitiatory formula of this “Baz” is taken from the Khshnuman of
Afrinagan Gatha.

Ih ice. May the Immortal Souls reach (unto my prayers) during (the five days of) the Gatha
Gahambars (viz. Ahunavad, Ushtavad, Spentomad, Vohukhshathra, and Vahishtoisht.)


--- Page 110 ---

94 KHORDEH AVESTA

jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tant
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pashem4n pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazd4o, tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem: staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohii
3. Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésn6 (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha.

Ahurahe Mazdao% raévatd’ khvarenanguhato*®, Ameshanam Spenta-
nam’, gathabyo” spentabyo" ratukhshathraby6” ashaonibyo'’, Ahuna-
vaityao Gathayao™, Ushtavaityao Gathayao', Spentamainyéush Gatha-
yao’, Vohikhshathrayao Gathayado”’. Vahishtoishtdish Gathayao'’,
ashaunam” fravashinam” ughranam”' aiwithiranam”, paoiryotkaésha-
nam’, fravashinam™, nabanazdishtanam” fravashinam”, khshnaothra?’
yasnaicha”* vahmaicha” khshnaothraicha” frasastayaécha*', Yatha Ahu
Vairyo” zaota® fra me“ mrite*, atha ratush ashatchit hacha*, fra
ashava*’ vidhvao* mraoti.

For the pleasure?’ (of the Creator Hormazd), for the worship** (of all
these) - of (the Creator) Hormazd*, the keeper of treasures’, glorious®, of the
Bountiful Immortals’, (amongst) the beneficent” Gathas'® which are the
Lords” of truthfulness” (and) holy'’, of the Gatha Ahunavad"™, the Gatha
Ushtavad'’, the Gatha Spentomad'®, the Gatha Vohukhshathra'’, the Gatha
Vahishtoisht'* (and) of the Fravashis*®, the powerful?! (and) triumphant”, of
the righteous (people)’’, the Fravashis™“ of the Poryotkaeshas*, (and) the
Fravashis of the next of kin”, - for (their) praise’, propitiation*®, and
glorification*', let the Zaotar - the officiating priest*’ - proclaim before me*4
(the excellences of the verses of) Yatha Ahu Vairyo’. (The Raspi or the
assistant Priest who is) righteous’? (and) learned*®* may announce® (the
excellences of the verses) atha ratush ashatchit hacha*®.

Ahurem Mazdam* raévantem“ khvarenanguhantem” yazamaide*;
Amesha Spenta“ hukhshathra*® hudhaongh6d* yazamaide’’; Gathao
Spentao* ratukhshathrao” ashaonish* yazamaide*!; Ahunavaitim
Gatham® ashaonim™ ashahe™ ratim® yazamaide™%; Ushtavaitim
Gatham* ashaonim® ashahe® ratim® yazamaide’; Spentamainyim
Gatham® ashaonim® ashahe ratim™ yazamaide®; Vohukhshathram
Gatham® ashaonim®” ashahe ratim® yazamaide®; Vahishtdishtim
Gatham” ashaonim” ashahe” ratiim’ yazamaide™; ashaunam”™
vanguhish” surao” spentao” fravashayo” yazamaide*®. Ahunem
Vairim*! tanim® paiti*®, Ahunem Vairim tanim paiti, Ahunem Vairim
tanim piiti.

Note: (In this place 1200 Yatha Ahti Vairyo should be recited).

We praise® (the Creator) Hormazd”, the keeper of treasures*' (and)

li Its meaning can be, “ruling over the chieftains”, Which rule over the time or period”. (Dr.
Spiegel).


--- Page 111 ---

BAZ OF RECITING YATHA AHU VAIRYO 1200 95

glorious”: we praise*’ the Bountiful Immortals“* (who are) good discreet*®

rulers*’; we praise*! the beneficent** Gathas*’ (which are) the Lords of Truth”
(and) holy*: we praise** the holy* Ahunavad Gatha*’; the Ushtavad Gatha,*’
Spentomad Gatha,” the holy Vohukhshathra Gatha® and the Vahishtoisht
Gatha” (which are) the Lords” of Righteousness”; we worship® the good’”®,
heroic” (and) beneficent” Fravashis” of the righteous (people)”. Ahunavar*!
‘iprotects®* the body*.

(To recite in baz) Ahura Mazdao Khodae, awazini mardum, mardum
sardagan, hama _ sardagin, hambayaste vehan, oem _ behedin
mazdayasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad; aediin bad. (To recite aloud)
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha afrmami, Ahurahe
Mazdao raévatd khvarenanguhatd, Ameshanam Spentanam. Gathabyo
spentabyd ratukhshathrabyd ashaonibyo, Ahunavaityao Gathayao,
Ushtavaityao Gathayao, Spentamainyéush Gathayao, Vohikhshathra-
yao Gathayao, Vohishtdishtdish Gathayao, ashadunam fravashinam
ughranam aiwithiranam paoiryd-tkaéshanam fravashinam, nabanaz-
dishtanam fravashinam. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me Avangahe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Avesta concerning the immense joy which the Soul experiences in the
hope of getting Heaven after the passing away of a virtuous and pious man."

Ushtavaitim' gatham? sravayo°? ushtatatem* nimraomno*. Ushta‘
ahmai’ yahmai® ushta’? kahmaichit'’ vase-khshayans'' Mazdao” dayat'*
Ahuro".

(The heavenly soul) 'chants* Ushtavad' Gatha? desiring® happiness? (for
himself), (and speaks): “Happiness® (be) unto (the) man’, from whom?
happiness? (reaches) others'®! May Ahura Mazda’*""* ruling at His Own Will”
grant’? (happiness) (to that benevolent person)!”

Avesta concerning the dejection and terror which the Soul experiences
owing to the fear of the punishment of hell, after the death of the wicked and

Im

sinful man™.
Kimam!' gathvyam’ vach6o* sravayo‘*; kam* nemoi® zim’, Ahura®
lj For its explanation, see Srosh Baz.

Ik For its detailed description, see my Yasht Ba Maeni, Yasht 22, Second fargard of Hadhokht
Nask, paras 1-18.

ll This entire paragraph occurs in the Second fargard of the Hadokht Nask, para 2. Moreover, the
initial portion up to nimraomno occurs also in Yasna Ha 71, para 16, and the remaining portion
from ushta up to Ahuré also occurs in Yasna Ha 43, Stanza 1.

Im Original meaning “singer, chanter, (is) singing”. Present participle, parasmaipada, nominat-
ive singular; original base srdvayant - singing”, srdvaya (casual form).


--- Page 112 ---

96

Mazda’, kuthra!’ nemdi!! ayeni’?."

KHORDEH AVESTA

The sinful soul 'chants* the hymn? of the Gatha? with sorrow and
despondency' (and speaks frightfully): “O Ahura Mazda**! (now) to what*
land’ shall I turn® ? Whither’? shall I turn'! to go?”””

NAMES OF THE DAYS AND MONTHS
(Names of Thirty Days)

1. Dadar Hormazd 16. Meher yazad

2. Behman Ameshaspand 17. Srosh yazad

3. Ardibehesht Ameshaspand 18. Rashne Rast yazad
4. Sheherevar Ameshaspand 19. Farrokh Farvardin
5. Asfandarmad Ameshaspand 20. Bahram yazad

6. Khordad Ameshaspand 21. Mino Ram

7. Amardad Ameshaspand 22. Govad yazad

8. Dae pa Adar Dadar 23. Dae pa Din Dadar
9. Adar yazad 24. Din yazad

10. Avan Ardvi Sur Banoo 25. Mino Ashishvangh
11. Khorshed yazad 26. Ashtad yazad

12. Mohor yazad 27. Mino Asman

13. Tir yazad 28. Zamiad yazad

14. Gosh yazad 29. Mino Marespand
15. Dae pa Meher Dadar 30. Mino Aneran

(Names of Twelve Months)

1. Farrokh Farvardin

2. Ardibehesht Ameshaspand
3. Khordad Ameshaspand

4. Teshtar Tir yazad

5. Amardad Ameshaspand

6. Sheherevar Ameshaspand
7. Meher yazad

8. Avan yazad

9, Adar yazad

10. Dae Dadar

11. Bahman Ameshaspand
12. Asfandarmad Ameshaspand

Explanation Regarding Five days of Gatha-Gahambar

(Note: The under mentioned five Gathas come at the end of Asfandarmad

In For its detailed description, see my Yasht Ba Mdaeni, Yasht 22, Hadokht Nask, fargard third,

paras 19-36.

lo This entire paragraph occurs in Hadokht Nask, para 20; besides its later portion also occurs in

Yasna Ha 46, stanza first.


--- Page 113 ---

NAMES OF THE DAYS AND MONTHS 97

Month).

1. Ahunavad- 2. Ushtavad- 3. Spentomad. 4. Vohikhshathra- 5.
Vahishtoisht.

(Note: Five Days of the Gathas in “Roz Nek Nam” should be recited as
Roz under-mentioned.)

Geh Gathabyo Geh Ahunavad, Geh (falan)
Geh Gathabyod Geh Ushtavad, Geh (falan)
Geh Gathabyod Geh Spentomad, Geh (falan)
Geh Gathabyo Geh Vohikhshathra, Geh (falan)
Geh Gathabyod Geh Vahishtoisht, Geh (falan)

Explanation:- The above-mentioned names of the Five Gatha-Gahambars
are derived from the names of the Gathas of Zarathushtra. When five days were
added to 360 days of the year, names of any five best things from amongst the
Zoroastrians were discovered which could only be applied to these additional
five days. As they could not find more revered names except the names of the
Five Gathas of Zarathushtra, they were assigned to these five days.’” Besides,
these five Gatha Gahambars are known by more names than one:-(1) Panje
Andarangan, i.e. five intermediate days, i.e. five days between the last month of
a year and the first month of the year after that. (2) Panje Meh, i.e. understood as
five big days. Out of the ten days of the Fravartikan the first five days are
regarded as Panje Keh, and the other five days, i.e. five days of the Gathas as
greater. (3) Panje ashoan, i.e. the last five days of coming of the Fravashis of the
righteous people in this world.

Explanation Regarding Six Gahambars of the Year.

1. Maediozarem. 2. Maedioshahem 3. Paeteshahem. 4. Ayathrem. 5.
Maediarem. 6. Hamaspathmaedaem.

(Note: The explanation of the above mentioned Gahambars and their
seasons according to Avesta are to be understood as under:-)

1. Maediozarem - This Gahambar or Seasonal Festival begins with the Roz
Khorshed of the Month Ardibehesht and ends with the Roz Dae Pa Meher. The
meaning of this word is “full verdure” or “the period of mid-spring”. On the
occasion of this Gahambar fertility or essence in the trees and plants is on the
increase.

2. Maedioshahem - This Gahambar or (Seasonal Festival) begins with the
Roz Khorshed of the Month Tir and ends with the Roz Dae Pa Meher. The
meaning of this word is “the period of Mid-Summer”. On the occasion of this
Gahambar the fields or farms are full of corns.

3. Paeteshahem - This Gahambar, Seasonal Festival, begins with the Roz

Ip Zartoshti Abhyas, No. 11, pages 200-201.


--- Page 114 ---

98 KHORDEH AVESTA

Ashtad of the Month Sheherevar and ends with the Roz Aneran. The meaning of
this word is “the harvest-season” During the departing summer corns and fruits
are ripe and the period of gathering the harvest approaches. This period is called
“Paeteshahem Gahambar’’.

4. Ayathrem - This Gahambar begins with the Roz Ashtad of the Month
Meher and ends with the Roz Aneran. The exact meaning of this word has not
been still ascertained. In its context in Yasna Ha 1, 2, and 3, as well as in
Vispered Kardah 1 and 2, words like “fraourvaéshtrem varshniharshta” occur. Dr.
Spiegel translates these words as “increaser (and) strength-giver”. Sheth
Kharshedji Rustamji Kamaji translated it, “bringing to an end (of summer), and
the spender of the seed of males of the rutting season”, when the male animals
are in heat; i.e. on the occasion of this Gahambar the Summer would end. And
the rutting season of some animals take place.

5. Maediarem - This Gahambar begins from the Roz Meher of the
Month Dae and ends with the Roz Bahram. It literally means the period of
perfect rest owing to slack business and trade due to excessive cold and
heavy rains.

6. Hamaspathmaedaem - This Gahambar is the name of the five days of
the Gatha Gahambar immediately following the completion of the month
Asfandarmad. The meaning of the word is “the equal proportion of heat and
cold, and the division of 24 hours of the day into two equal parts of 12
hours.”

DESCRIPTION OF THE JASHANS OF TWELVE MONTHS
Mah 1 Farrokh Farvardin

* Roz First Dadar Hormazd - Naoroz or the New Year’s Day.
¢ Roz Third Ardibehesht - the Day of Consecration of Rapithwan.
* Roz Sixth Khordad - Khordad Sal Jashan'*
* Roz Nineteenth Farvardin - Jashan of Farvardegan
Mah 2 Ardibehesht Amsehaspand

¢ Roz Third Ardibehesht - Jashan Day of Ardibehesht Month.
* Roz Eleventh Khorshed to Roz fifteenth Dae Pa Meher - Five Days

lq This day has been regarded as the greatest day in later Books pertaining to our Religion, be-
cause on that day many important events concerning the Ancient Iranian History took place. Of
them the principal events are: (1) (The Creator) Hormazd created the first pair on this world
called Mashya and Mashyana. (2) The first King of Ancient Iran Gayomard was born. (3) King
Hoshang estabilished the Peshdadian Dynasty. (4) Tehemuras who was called “Devband” de-
feated Ahreman and the divs. (5) King Faredun distributed his sovereignty amongst his three
sons. (6) Sam Nariman killed a most powerful demon. (7) King Kaikhosrou killed Afrasiab. (8)
King Kaikhosrou left his throne (became a resident in the Mountain) and went into seclusion.
(9) Prophet Holy Zartosht was born. (10) Holy Zarathushtra was blessed with (received) the
knowledge of the religion by Hormazd and (Prophetship from the Creator Hormazd) emerged as
a prophet.


--- Page 115 ---

DESCRIPTION OF THE JASHANS OF TWELVE MontHs 99
of Maediozarem Gahambar.

Mah 3 Khordad Ameshaspand.
* Roz Sixth Khordad - Jashan Day of Khordad Month.
Mah 4 Teshtar Tir.

¢ From Roz Eleventh Khorshed to Roz Fifteenth Dae Pa Meher - Five
Days of Maedioshahem Gahambar.

* Roz 13th Tir - Jashan Day of Tir Month - Tiryan Jashan.
Mah 5 Amardad Ameshaspand

* Roz Seventh Amardad - Jashan of Amardad Month
Mah 6 Sheherevar Ameshaspand

* Roz Fourth Sheherevar - Jashan of Sheherevar Month.

¢ From Roz 26 Ashtad to Roz 30 Aneran - Five Days of the
Paeteshahem Gahambar.

Mah 7 Meher Yazad.
* Roz Sixteenth Meher - Jashan of Meher Month.
¢ From Roz 26 Ashtad to Roz 30 Aneran - Five days of the Ayathrem
Gahambar.
Mah 8 Avan Ardvi Sur Banu.
* Roz Tenth Avan - Jashan of Avan Month
Mah 9 Adar Yazad
* Roz Ninth Adar - Jashan of Adar Month
* Roz Nineteenth Farvardin- Fravartikan Jashan"
Mah 10 Dae Dadar
* Roz First Dadar Hormazd - First Jashan of the Month Dae.
* Roz eighth Dae Pa adar Dadar - Second Jashan of Month Dae.

* Roz Eleventh Khorshed - the Anniversary of the death of the
Prophet Zarathushtra’ (Zartosht-no-Diso).

¢ Roz Fifteenth Dae Pa Meher Dadar - Third Jashan of Month Dae.
¢ From Roz 16 Meher to - Five days of Maediarem
¢ Roz 20 Bahram Gahambar.

Ir If a person dies either during the sea voyage or a journey by land or under any other diffi-
culties (calamities), and if the day of his death could not be ascertained, the Fravartikan Jashan
day is applied as of his death.

Is i.e. the day of the death of the Prophet Zarathushtra.


--- Page 116 ---

100 KHORDEH AVESTA

* Roz 23 Dae Pa Din Dadar - Fourth Jashan of Month Dae.
Mah 11th Bahman Ameshaspand.
* Roz Second Bahman - Jashan of Month Bahman.
Mah 12th Asfandarmad Ameshfaspand.
* Roz Fifth Asfandarmad - Jashan of Asfandarmad Month.
* Roz Sixth Khordad - "Jashan of Avardad Salgah.

* From Roz 26 Ashtad — 10 days of Fravartikan-Muktad. Roz 29
Marespand - Mino Marespand Jashan."

NAMES OF SEVEN HAMKARS - COLABORATEURS.
1. Hormazd - Dae Pa Adar, Dae Pa Meher, Dae Pa Din.
2. Bahman - Mohor, Gosh, Ram.
3. Ardibehesht - Adar, Srosh, Bahram
4. Sheherevar - 'Khur, Meher, Asm4n, Aneran.
5. Asfandarmad - Avan, Din, "Ard, Marespand.
6. Khordad - Tir, “Arda-Fravash, Govad.
7. Amardad - Rashne, Ashtad, Zamyad.

NAMES OF 12 YAZATAS OF HAMAYASHT

1. Dadar Hormazd 2. Teshtar Tir yazad.
3. Khorshed yazad. 4. Mohor yazad.
5. Adar yazad. 6. Avan ardvi Sur Banoo.

It This Jashan was performed every four year with great pomp and splendour during the times of
our Iranian Kings. According to the movement of the Sun, generally every year isof 365 1/4
days. (If calculated accurately, it is365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes and 49 seconds). For filling the
gap owing to the diminution of 1/4 day every year, which comes to one full day at four years,
our Zoroastrian ancestors used to add one day every four years after the completion of Five days
of Gatha. The additional day was called “Avardad Sal gah”, on which one big Jashan ceremony
was performed. Besides, in the Khshnuman, or propitiatory formula of this Jashan any special
yazata was not worshipped, but, especially, all the divisions of the year used to be remembered.
The significance of this Jashan can easily be noticed thereby, and its importance as the “Gatha
of the year” gets fixed more and more. The meaning of “Gah” in addition to “Gatha” is “time,
period”, too). Owing to the discontinuance of the usage of adding the additional day at every
four years, the Jashan is at present performed on the Roz Khordad of the Month Asfandarmad.
For further details, see Zarthoshti Abhyas by Sheth K.R. Cama, pp. 523-528.

lu On this day, Holy Zarathushtra, in order to convince the truth of His Prophetship, demon-
strated to King Gushtasp the validity of his Religion by performing miracles.

lv “Khur” should be understood as “Khorshed”.
lw “Ard” should be understood as Ashish, i.e. “Ashishvangh”’.
Ix Ardafravash should be understood as “Farvardin (the day of the holy Fravashis).


--- Page 117 ---

NAMES OF 12 YAZATAS OF HAMAYASHT 101

7. Asfandarmad Ameshaspand. 8. Govad yazad.

9. Khordad Ameshaspand. 10. Amardad Ameshaspand.
11. Srosh yazad. 12. Farrokh Farvardin.
NAMES OF 21 NASKS.

1. Satudgar 2. Vahishta Mansar

3. Bagh 4. Damdad or Dvazdah Hamast
5. Nadur 6. Pajeh or Pajam

7. Ratoshtai 8. Barash

9. Kashasrub 10. Vishtaspashah or Vishtasp.
11. Khesht 12. Jerasht

13. Safand 14. Baghan yasht

15. Niyaram 16. Dvasrujad or dvasraub

17. Asparam 18. Askaram

19. Jud-dev-dad 20. Hadokht

21. Satud yasht

The 21 Nasks mentioned above were written in Avesta language, and
besides all the Avestan texts of the Religion and all the Commandments and
Laws of the Religion concerning this world, the spiritual world, Behest
(Paradise), Dozakh (Hell), instructions about Justice, Ethics, Philosophy,
Medicine, Astrology and all other kinds of sciences have been incorporated
in them.

For those who can neither read nor recite by heart the Avesta, it is
enjoined in the Persian Rivayets to recite Yatha - Ashem as under:-

Recite Yatha Aht Vairyo:
¢ 103 for Khorshed Nyayesh.
¢ 65 for Meher Nyayesh.
¢ 65 for Mah Bokhtar Nyayesh.
¢ 65 for Ardvi Sura Nyayesh.
* 65 for Atash Nyayesh
¢ 121 and Ashem Vohii 12 for Patet.
¢ 103 and Ashem Vohii 12 for Hormazd yasht
¢ 65 for Ardibehesht yasht.
¢ 75 for Srosh Yasht Hadokht.
¢ 103 for Srosh Yasht Large.
¢ 121 and Ashem Vohii 12 for Afringan.


--- Page 118 ---

102

KHORDEH AVESTA



--- Page 119 ---

YASHTS 103

YASHTS

HORMAZD YASHT
Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdan Hormazd Khodae awazini gorje khoreh awazayad;
Dadar Hormazd raydOmand khorehmand mindan mind beretum
berasad.”

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum: az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, men pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast oem bin bid ested, az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani get! mindani okhe avakhsh pashem4n pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazd4o, tardidite angrahe mainyéush:
haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi Ashem: Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ferastuye humatdibyascha hukhtoibyascha hvarshtdibyascha,
manthvodibyascha vakhedhvoibyascha varshtvdibyascha. Aibigairya
daithe vispa humatacha hikhtacha hvarshtacha. Paitirichya daithe
vispa dushmatacha duzhukhtacha duzhvarshtacha. Fera ve rahi,
Amesha Spenta, yasnemcha vahmemcha, fera manangha, fera
vachangha, fera shyaothana, fera anghuya, fera tanvaschit khvakhyao
ushtanem. ’Staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohi 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaevd Ahura-tkaésh6o (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Ahurahe Mazdao
raevatO khvarenanguhato "™khshnaothra  yasnaicha vahmiaicha
khshnaothrdaicha frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi Vairy6 zaota fra-me mrite,
atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti.

(1) Peresat! Zarathushtrd? Ahurem Mazdam? Ahura Mazda‘ mainyod*
spénishta® datare’ gaéthanam! astvaitinam’ ashaum", misvanahe gatvo"
khvadhatahe”. Kat"? asti‘’ manthrahe spentahe’’ amavastemem", kat'’
verethravastemem"®, "kat khvarenanguhastemem” kat?’ yaskeres-
temem”’, (2) kat” varethraghnyétemem”, kat™* baeshazyétemem”, kat”
tbaésh6-taurvayanstemem””’ daévanam’ mashyanamcha”;  kat*?
vispahe*! anghéush® astvatd** mana™ asti* vijaghmishtem*; kat*’

ly ie. may the Creator Hormazd (who is) the keeper of treasures, (and) glorious, the Spirit
amongst the Spirits and the most exalted come (to my help)!
Iz For the translation of this para, see Khorshed Nyayesh.

ma i.e. for the worship of (the Creator) Hormazd, the keeper of treasures and glorious, etc. (see
Khorshed Nyayesh, above).

mb In this paragraph the word “Kat” is employed before every adjective, but I have translated it
only once.


--- Page 120 ---

104 KHORDEH AVESTA

vispahe® anghéush” astvato” anghvam"! asti*” vimarezishtem*.

(1) (The Prophet) Zarathushtra’ asked' (the Creator) Hormazd?, O, Most
Beneficent® Spirit’, Righteous’? Creator’ Ahura Mazda* of the corporeal’
world’ (and) of the natural’? "-Hameshtagehan"'! Which” (part) of the Holy
“Spell’> is most courageous'®, victorious'*, glorious'’, efficacious*', fiend-
smiting’, most health-giving’’, and destroying effectively (best)’’ the malice
of the daevas”* and (wicked) men??™ Which*? (part) (of the Holy Spell) is
most reaching* (helping) the mind*, (and) purifying® the soul"! in the entire
corporeal world?

(3) Aat' mraot? Ahurd Mazdao? ahmakem‘* nama‘, Spitama®
Zarathushtra’, yat® Ameshanam Spentanam’. Tat’? asti'! manthrahe”
spentahe’? amavastemem”", tat'S verethravastamem", tat!” khvarenangu-
hastemem", *tat’? yaskerestemem”’, (4) tat?! varethraghnydtemem”, tat”
baeshazyotemem™, tat*  tbaéshd-taurvayanstemem”, daévanam?’
mashyanamcha**; tat” vispahe*” anghéush*! astvatO mana_asti*4
vyaghmishtem*, ™tat®* vispahe*’ anghéush* astvato® anghvam”“ asti*!
vimarezishtem™.

(3) The' (the Creator) Hormazd? then replied: O,! Spitaman
Zarathushtra’! the names? of us*, (our names) the Bountiful Immortals’.

Explanation: (According to the above sentence, the Creator Hormazd
Himself is considered as an Amshaspand: see p. 4 for further explanation).

That’ (part) of the Holy’? Spell’? is'' most courageous”, victorious’®,
glorious", efficacious”’, (4) most fiend-smiting”, most health-giving™* (and)
effectively destroying the malice” of the daevas”” and (wicked) men’’; that”
(part of the Holy Spell) is*’ most reaching* (i.e. helping) the mind* in the
entire*® corporeal” world?! (and) most purifying” the soul”.

Explanation: Manthra Spenta, i.e. beneficent or holy spell. The original
meaning of mdnthra (Sanskrit mantra) is “secret mysteries of the Zoroastrian

An”

me “Hameshtagehan” is known as a place between heaven and hell. For those persons whose
good deeds and sins are equal, the fixed place in that world beyond is called, “hameshtagtehan”’.
According to the suggestion of Dr. Roth (as communicated by Darmesteter) reference to
Hameshtagehan is found in the Gathas (in Yasna Ha 33.1), see my Gathad Ba Mdeni, yazishn Ha
33, Stanza | and its explanation. The original meaning of Hameshtageh4an, which is called in
Avesta “misvana gatu” is the place of “mediocre profit”. These words occur in Vendidad fargard
19, para 36, and in the khshnuman of Mino Aneran. In this khshnuman, the word
“Hameshtagehan” occurs along with “Endless Lights”, Garothman Heaven and the Chinvat
Bridge. Here the words, “misvananhe gatvo khvadhatahe” presumably seems to have been ad-
ded later on. Prof. Westergaard and Dr. Geldner have not given these words in the text in their
Avestan Editions, but have taken them in the footnotes: Drs. Spiegel, Harlez and Darmesteter
have therefore left these words untranslated.

md Removing or dismissing (the wicked) thought, (Darmesteter).

me In this paragraph the word tat occurs before every adjective, but I have translated it only
once.


--- Page 121 ---

HORMAZD YASHT 105

9 66.

Religion”, “mysterious excellences of the Zoroastrian Religion”. A reference
about this we find in Vispered Kardah 13, first paragraph, thus: “Ashem
vispem manthrem yazamaide: Zarathushtrem hadhamanthrem yazamaide”,
i.e. we worship the entire manthra as holy; we worship Zarathushtra who is
one with manthras or the composer of the manthras. In several later books it
is stated that some writings of the Prophet Zarathushtra were so mysterious
that even the great sages could not comprehend their meaning. Moreover,
many famous Persian writers call him, “Paegambare Ramz-gu” (i.e. Prophet
who reveals the secrets). We have no certain evidence at present as to how
many these manthras were originally given by him.

(5) Aat! aokhta? Zarathushtrd? frodit‘ me® tat® nama’ framriidhi’,
ashaum? Ahura Mazda", yat"! te! asti!? mazishtemcha"™, vahishtemcha'®
sraéshtemcha", yaskerestememcha”, varethraghnyotememcha"™,
baéshazyotememcha”,  tbaésh6-taurvayanstememcha™”, daévanam?!
mashyanamcha”, (6) “Yatha® azem*4 taurvayeni?® vispe?® daéva?’
mashyanscha*, yatha” azem*  taurvayeni*! vispe* yatavo*™
pairikaoscha™“, yat mam* naé* chish*’ taurvayat*, nodit*? daévo*,
naédha“' mashyo”, noit* yatavo“ naédha* pairikao”.

(5) Zarathushtra* then' said’: O Holy? Ahura Mazda’! tell* me* indeed*
that® name’ of Thine’? which" is’* the greatest'*, best!*, excellent'®, most
efficacious'’, fiend-smiting'* the most healing!’ (and) destroying the malice”
of the daevas*! and men” positively; (6) so that” (i.e. with the help of that
name) I** may overcome” all** the daevas’’ and (wicked) men”: so that”? [°°
may overcome! all*? wizards*? and witches™: that*> no*® one*’, neither the
daevas*’ nor*! men”, neither*’ the wizards“ nor* the witches*’, may afflict**®
me*>.

(7) Aat! mraot? Ahurd Mazdao’, frakhshtya* nama‘ ahmi‘, ashaum’
Zarathushtra*: bity6? vanthvy6o"; thrityo" avitanyo”; tiirya'’ Asha™
Vahishta'®; pukhdha'® vispa’’ vohi'® Mazda-dhata” asha-chithra”;
khshtvo?! yat” ahmi® khratush™; haptatho* khratumao” ashtem6”’
yat® ahmi” chistish*; naumd6*' chistivao*. (8) Dasemo* yat* ahmi*
spano*; aévandaso* spananguhao*; dvadaso* Ahurd”; thridasd*
sévishtd”; chathradas6* imat* vidvaéshtvo*; panchadasa* avanemna“’;
khshvash-dasa*® hata*” marenish; haptadasa®! vispa® hishas*;
ashtadasa™ baéshazya™; navadasa® yat*s’ ahmi*® dato”; visanstem6o”
ahmi® yat® ahmi®* Mazdao™ nama®.

(7) Ahura Mazda’ then! replied”: (My) first® name*, O Holy Zarathushtra*!

is "I exist’; (My) second’ (name) is pertaining to herd'® (or protecting

mf Dr. Geldner takes this para sixth as a verse of seven lines: every line ends at comma.

mg i.e. I am ever (and always existing living). But if we take the meaning of “frakhshtya” from
the root “peres” (= to ask), then the meaning of frakhshtya* nama* ahmi® can alternatively be:-
(my first) name’, (I) am® worthy of being asked or inquired‘ (i.e. every one desires to ask or in-


--- Page 122 ---

106 KHORDEH AVESTA

herds of cattle and multitudes of men): (My) third'! (name) the ™AII-
Pervading’; (My) fourth’? (name) Supreme!* Righteousness"; (My) fifth’®
(name) All Good Things'* created by Mazda’’, containing the seed of
righteousness”; (My) sixth? (name) is that” (1) Myself am*? Wisdom”; (My)
seventh’?> (name) Endowed with Wisdom”; (My) eighth?’ (I Myself) am”
Knowledge*’; (My) ninth?’ (name) Endowed with Knowledge*;

(8) (My) tenth*? (name) is (I myself) am* Increase*® (growth) (or
Prosperity)*°; (My) eleventh*’ (name) the Increaser**; (My) twelfth*? (name)
Ahura” (i.e. the bestower of life): (My) thirteenth*! (name) the most
Beneficent”; (My) fourteenth*’ (name) without Opponent*: (My) fifteenth*®
(name) the ™Invincible*’; (My) sixteenth*® (name) the One Who maintains
account” of (the deeds of) ™men*; (My) seventeenth®! (name) the All*-
Seeing®; (My) eighteenth™ (name) the Healer*; (My) nineteenth**(name) (1)
am* the Creator’; twentieth’ Omniscient™.

(9) Yazaésha' mam? Zarathushtra’ paiti asni* paiti khshafne* yaso-
beretabyo° zaothrabyo’. Jasani® te? avanghaécha” rafnanghaécha"!
Azem” yo? Ahurd Mazdao"; jasaiti'> te!’ avanghaécha rafnanghaécha"®
yo” vanghush”® Sraoshd”! Ashyd”; jasdonti* te avanghaécha* raf-
nanghaécha” yao”’ 4p6”*, yaoscha” urvarao™”, yaoscha*! ashaunam” fra-
vashayo*’.

(9) O Zarathushtra*! thou shouldst worship! Me’ by day* and by night*
(i.e. every time) with libations’ brought for yasna®. I'? who’? am Ahura
Mazda" will come® for thy’ help’? and joy''; He who’? is good”? and holy
Srosh (yazata) will come for thy'® help'? and joy'’; the waters”® and the
plants*® and the Fravashis* of the righteous (people)? will come” for thy™
help®’ and joy”®.

(10) "“Yezi' vashi? Zarathushtra’, avao‘ tbaeshao* taurvayd®, daéva-
nam mashyanamcha’, yathvam’ pairikanamcha"™, sathram" kaoyam”
karafnamcha’, mairyanamcha™ bizangranam', ashemaoghanamcha"’®
bizangranam”, vehrkanamcha", chathvare-zangranam”.

(11) Haénayadoscha” perethu-ainikayao”', perethu-drafshayao”,
eredhvo-drafshayao”*, uzgereptoédrafshayao™“, khrirem’* drafshem”
quire about Me) or taking it in other way - the One of whom the questions pertaining the reli-

gion, are asked, i.e. by the Prophet and greatdivine sages: see Vendidad 18.60; Vendidad 22.19;
Yazishna Ha 43.10.

mh “Powerful” (Darmesteter): “A constitutor of beings” (Harlez).
mi Original meaning “not smitten”.

mj The giver of reward or punishment in that world in accordance with the good or wicked
deeds performed in this world after weighing in the balance, cf. hata-marane (Yazishn Ha 32.
stanza 6).

mk Dr. Geldner takes the entire tenth paragraph as a verse of 8 lines: each line ends at Comma

().


--- Page 123 ---

HORMAZD YASHT 107

barentayao”’, atha”* imao” namenish*” drenjay6o™, framrava”, vispaish*
ayancha™ khshafnascha*.

(10) If’ thou wishest’, Zarathushtra*! to destroy® this* malice’ (which is)
of the daevas’, (wicked) men’, the wizards’, witches’, of the tyrants’', the
™kiks”, the karaps!’, of the biped's ™"serpents’®, (i.e. men having nature of a
serpent), the two-legged'’ ™Ashmogs’®, the four-footed'? wolves'’, (11) (and)
of the ™’armies”’ in wide battle array”', "’with broad banners”, uplifted
banners*, banners raised on high”, (and) banners (bearing)?’ cruel?
weapons, then”* shouldst thou recite aloud” these” names* every* day™,
every night®.

(12) Payushcha! ahmi’, datacha*® thratacha* ahmi*, znatacha®
mainyushcha’ ahmi® spentdtem6°®; baéshazaya’ nama! ahmi’?,
baéshazay6tema® nama ahmi!’; athrava'®’ nama” ahmi!*, athra-
vatema!’ nama” ahmi”!; Ahura” nama*® ahmi™“, Mazdao* nama”
ahmi?’?; ashava”® nama” ahmi*’, ashavastema*! nama” ahmi*;
khvarenangha™ nama* ahmi**; khvarenanguhastema*’ nama*®* ahmi”;
pourudarshta” nama“ ahmi”, pourudarshtema* nama“ ahmi*; diraé-
darshta* nama“ ahmi*, diiraé-darshtema” nama ahmi*!.

(12) (The Creator Hormazd says): I am? the Protector’, I am* the Creator’
and the Nourished, I am® the Discerner (or prognosticator) and the Most
Beneficent? Spirit’. | am’? the Healer'®, the Best Healer’, I am'* Athravan'®
(i.e. Mobed-Dastur), the Best Athravan"’; I am™* Ahura” (i.e. Giver of Life): I
am?’ Mazda* (i.e. Omniscient); I am*° the Righteous”’, the Most Righteous"’;
I am* the Glory* by name*’, I am* the Most Glorious*’: I am* the All
Seeing” omniscient.

(13) Spashta! nama? ahmi’, vita* nima‘* ahmi*; data’ nama® ahmi’,
pata’ nama" ahmi”, thrata® nama“ ahmi; znata’ nama!’ ahmi’,
znoishta’ nama” ahmi”'; fshumao” nama” ahmi™; fshushOmanthra’>
nama” ahmi?’; ise-khshathrd”> nama” ahmi**; ise-khshathryétema*!
nama” ahmi®; namdkhshathro* nama** ahmi*; namd-khshathry6-
tem6*’ nama* ahmi”.

(13) I am? the Watcher' and the ™‘All-Pervading* by name*: I am°® the
Bestower’; I am" the Protector'®; I am'* the Nourisher'’ and the Discerner'®

ml Kiks and karaps: See glossary.

mm or “of the sinners, of the thieves”, (Darmesteter).

mn Ashmog, i.e. distorter of truth, heretic.

mo “Of the hordes with the wide front”, (Harlez and Darmesteter).

mp The Persian equivalent of the word “drafsh” is “derafsh”, the meanings of which are flag
and a piercing weapon”: from this in some place the meaning of “drafsh” can be “spear:
bannered spear’’.

mq Or lover, doer of good, friend (root vi = to love).


--- Page 124 ---

108 KHORDEH AVESTA

(i.e. Omniscient); I am*! the Most-Discerning’’; I am™ the Increaser”, I am?’
the Hymn of ™Prosperity” and the Ruler at Will?® by name”’: I am*® the Most
Ruling at Will*'; I am*° the most renowned ™Ruler by name*.

(14) Adhavish® nama“ ahmi*”, vidhavish*® nama“ ahmi*: paiti-
payush* nama“ ahmi*, tbaésh6-taurvao” nama ahmi*': hathravana™
nama® ahmi™, vispavana* nama ahmi*’: vispatash*® nama” ahmi”,
vispa-khvathra® nama® ahmi™: pouru®-khvathra® nama” ahmi%®,
khvathravao® nama” ahmi”.

(14) I am* the Non-deceiver*’, I am* ™Far from the Deceiver**: 1 am*
the ™Equable Protector*’. I am*! the Destroyer of Malice*: I am™ the
"Smiter at one stroke”: I am*’ One who smites everybody® every wrong
door: I am® the Modeller of all**. I am® All®'-Light® (or Comfort®): I am®
Full®-Light® (or Comfort-happiness)®*: I am” One Possessing Light® by
name”’.

(15) Verezi-saoka” nama” ahmi”, verezi-savao” nama” ahmi”; sévi’
nama” ahmi*, sirdo*! nama® ahmi*®, sévishta** nima*®* ahmi**; asha®’
nama*® ahmi®, bereza” nama®! ahmi”: khshathraya® naima™ ahmi*;
khshathrayotem0” nama” ahmi’*®: hudhanush® nama!”  ahmi',
hudhanushtemG? nama? ahmi*; diiraé-sika’ nama°* ahmi’. Taoscha®
imao’ namenish’®.

(13) I am™ "Brilliant in Work” by name”, I am” Useful-in-Work ”: I
am* the Beneficent”: I am® the Valiant*', I am*® the Most Profitable by
name*®: I am® Righteousness*’, I am” the Exalter”’; I am® the Sovereign” by
name™, I am** the Greatest Sovereign’; I am' Possessed of Good Wisdom”;
I am* Possessed of Best Wisdom? by name’: I am’ ™Having-a-piercing-
Look°. Such? (are) these* Names’® (of mine).

(16) Yascha* me* aétahmi® anghavo’ yat® astvainti’, Spitama’?
Zarathushtra"', imao’” namenish® drenjayo’ framrava"', paiti'® va’
asni’® paiti!? va? khshafne”!; (17) framrava” us va hisht6”, ni va!
paidhyamno”; ni va paidhyamno™, us va hisht6”°; aiwyaonghanem”’ va”*
aimyaonghayamno”, aiwyaonghanem®” va*' bijyamno”’; fra*® va*
shiisa* hacha* gataot®* fra*’ va** shiisa® va* shiisa® hacha zantaot”,
mr The Fshush6-manthra is also the name of Yazishn Ha 58.
ms Or famous King, ruler with glory.
mt Or one who cannot be deceived by anyone; “Smasher of deceit”, (Harlez).

mu Sanskrit prati = equally. Besides, if we take “paiti” equivalent to Sanskrit prati, meaning,
“lord, husband, master” in the paiti-payush, then it can mean “protector of the master or chiefs”.

mv or subjugator - conqueror at one stroke.

mw i.e. active in work “He who can benefit at His Wish” (Darmesteter); “producer of every be-
nefit” (Harlez); “profitable or beneficial” (Justi).

mx “He who does good for a long time,” (Darmesteter).


--- Page 125 ---

HORMAZD YASHT 109

fra‘! va” shisa® hacha danghaot“, ava-jasa* dakhyim 4%. (18) Noit®”
dim* nara” anghe ayan*', noit*? anghao™ khshapo“, aéshmd™*
dritahe® drukhsh*’ manangho* avasyat®. Noit® akavo', nodit®
chakav6%, ndit™ ishavo%, ndit® kareta”, noit® vazra®, noit” visenti”
asano” avasyat”.

(16) O Spitama’? Zarathushtra''! Whoever* in this® corporeal’ world®
(having) remembered" these’? Names" of Mine? doth recite aloud'’® every’®
day'* or” every’ night’.

Explanation: (At what time one should recite aloud, is stated below).

(17) (Whoever) may recite aloud” (these Names of Mine) whether
getting up”! or sitting down”, sitting down” or getting up”, while girding”
the Sacred Girdle’ or’**' ™ungirding®”, whether going* out®* from (his own)
place*’, or the village*®, or the country“ (and) arriving* at (some other)
country“, (18) unto that** person® during that® day*! (and) during that*?
night™ (i.e. at whatever time he prays), the cruel*°-minded** "’Druj*’ (called)
Eshma® shall not’? harm*; neither® hooks®! (or piercing weapon®') nor
™slings®, neither“ arrows® nor swords®’, neither clubs® nor” stones” will
">strike”! and harm” (the person).

(19) Visanstacha' imao? namenish* parshtascha‘ pairi-varascha®
visente®, pairi’ mainyaoyat® drujat®, varenyayateha’” dravanithyat",
ziziyushatcha’” kayadhat® vispo-mahrkaatcha™ pairi’> drvatat'® yat”’
angrat mainyaot'; manayen ahe yatha’” hazangrem naram”' dyum”
narem” aiwyakhshayoit™*.

Just as!” a thousand men keep watch™ over one” man*’, (in the same
way) these? names? (of the Creator Hormazd mentioned above) serve® as
admonition' and support* and protection’ (for the reciter) against’ the
invisible* Druj’ and the Varenian'®, wicked" and the sinful person’, bent on
destruction”, and against!’ the wicked’® fiend, full of plagues, Angra
Mainyu’.

(19) Ké verethrem-ja thw4 poi sengha yoi henti;

Chithra modi dam ahumbish ratiim chizdi,

At hdi vohi Seraosho janti manangha,

Mazda ahmai yahmii vashi kahmiichit."*

my Its meaning can be “tying the girdle” or “untying the girdle”.

mz If we take “aéshm6-drutahe” as a compound word according to Dr. Geldner’s Edition, then it
would mean the Druj rushing with the angry thought.

na quoits (Darmesteter)

nb Original meaning by “piercing”. If we consider the word “visenti” as an irregular adjective of
the word “asano”, the meaning of “visenti asano” can be “piercing stones” “sling-stones”
(Darmesteter).

nc For the explanation, see the translation of “Kem na Mazda”.


--- Page 126 ---

110 KHORDEH AVESTA

(20) Nemem! kavaém? khvarend*, nem6‘ airyene vaejahi*®, nemd°
saoke’ Mazdadhiite®, nem0d’ ape’ daityayao", nemo’ Areduyao™ apo"
anahitayao, nemem’® vispayao” ashaono'® stdish'®. Yatha Ahi Vairyo
10. Ashem Vohii 10.

(21) "Homage! to the Kayanian? Glory?, Homage‘ (be) unto “the Iran-
Vej>, Homage (be) unto “Saoka’ created by Hormazd*, Homage? (be) unto
the "River'® Vehdaiti'', Homage’ (be) unto the River'* Ardvi Sura'’, the
Undefiled'*, Homage" (be) unto the entire'’ Creation’? of Holy (Hormazd)'*.

(22) Ahunem Vairim”’ yazamaide”!: Ashem Vahishtem” sraéshtem”
Ameshem Spentem* yazamaide*. Amemcha” thrimemeha?’ aojascha”®
verethremcha”, khvarenascha® zavarecha*' yazamaide”. Ahurem
Mazdam*® raévantem™ khvarenanguhantem* yazamaide™.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(22) We praise?! Ahunavar”; we praise Ardibehesht” (who is) the
fairest’? Amshaspand™* (or Holy Immortal); we praise? courage’ and
prosperity’’, activity’ (or efficacy) and victory”, glory*’ and strength*’. We
worship** the Glorious** Hormazd*’, Keeper of the Treasures*.

(To recite in baz) Ahura Mazda Khodiae, avaziinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama_ sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem _behedin
mazdayasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad; aediin bad. (Recite aloud)
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

(24) Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami, Ahurahe
Mazdao raévatd khvarenanguhatod. Ashem Vohi 1.

(24) "Nipaydish! mashim? urvathem? yavaetaite’ Zarathushtra®
aurvathat® pard’ dushmainyaot*. Ma’ tem!’® urvathem" frayavaydish”
snathai'’, ma’ duz-beretée’s zyanam” apayatée'’: ma'® yasdish’? aom”
narem”! daitim”, yo? na“ mazishtem? yasnem” yazaite”’ kasishtem”®

nd “Neme,” instead of “nemo” seems to be the case attraction owing to Kavaem (Darmesteter).

ne i.e. the foremost abode of the Aryan people; the province situated in the North of the Moun-
tain Balurtag, between the rivers Oxus and Zekzartis.

nf The original meaning of the word “Saoka” is sharpness, activity of the mind, brightness of in-
tellect, splendour - brilliance of wisdom (root such = Sanskrit shuch = to shine): profit, prosper-
ity, happiness (root su = Persian sud = to profit). Metaphorically it should be understood as the
yazata presiding over these virtues.

ng The meaning of the Avesta word “Ap” like Persian “Ab” is also river, in addition to “water”.
About the River Vehdaiti, see Vendidad, fargard I, para 3.

nh The portion from “Nipaydish mashim” up to the end of this yasht is known as the remaining
paragraphs of the Bahman yasht. Dr. West published the English translation of the entire Pahlavi
Bahman Yasht along with the translation of Bundehesh in 1880 A. D. Dr. Spiegel had published
the German translation of a few passages of the Pahlavi Bahman Yasht.


--- Page 127 ---

HORMAZD YASHT 111

yasnat” frayatat® ahma*! yan** Ameshe Spente*.

(24) (The Creator Hormazd speaks to the Prophet Holy Zarathushtra): O
Zarathushtra*! Thou shouldst always‘ protect' the man’ friendly* (with you)
from’ evil-minded*® enemy’. Do not? let that’? friend'' remain any longer’, for
the stroke’? (of the enemy): (do) not'* (deliver him) to suffering pain’> from
the injury" (O Zarathushtra) do not'® bring harm’? unto that”? religious”
man?! who” out of the fixed*° yazishna consecrates (i.e. performs the yasna)
with the shorter’® (or) longer? yazishna*® in honour of us*'! who (are) the
Ameshaspand® (i.e. Holy Immortals)**.

(25) “Idha! asti? Vohu Mand?, mana‘ dami> Zarathushtra®. Idha’
Ashem Vahishtem’, mana’ dami!® Zarathushtra". Idha’” Khshathrem
Vairim!3, mana dami' Zarathushtra’®, Idha!’ Spenta Armaitish'*, mana”
dami” Zarathushtra”!, idha” WHaurvata> Ameretata™, yoi?> std”
mizdem”’ ashaunim’’, paro-asti” jasentam*®, mana*! dami*®
Zarathushtra**. (26) Vaéthacha™ tat-cha** kathacha**, 4i°7 Ashaum?**

Zarathushtra*: mana“ khrathwacha*! chisticha” yaish® 4 anghush“
paouruyo* bavat*, yathacha”’ anghat* apemem” anghush*’.

(25) ™Here’ (or this!) Behman* (Amshaspand), O Zarathushtra‘! is? My4
Creation®;" O Zarathushtra!'! Ardibehesht® (Ameshaspand) (is) My?
Creation’®: O Zarathushtra'*! here’? Sheherevar'? (Amshaspand) (is) My'*
Creation’®; O Zarathushtra*!! Aspandarmad'® (Amshaspand) (is) My’®
Creation; Khordad’*? and Amardad** (Ameshaspand) who* ""are’® the
reward”’ of the righteous** (people) whilst going*’ to the Spiritual World”,
(are also) My*' Creations”, O Zarathushtra**! (26) O Holy Zarathushtra!
Know thou™ now* that®* (it is through My*’ Sense*! and Wisdom* the
world“ was (created in the) beginning*, will ™remain* up to the end® in the
same way i.e. the world has the beginning and the end.

(27) Hazangrem baéshazanam, baévare baéshazanim; hazangrem
baéshazanam, ba€évare baéshazanam; hazangrem baéshazanam, baévare

ni Or alternatively: (Do) not'* (allow that friend to remain) in calamity,'’ of harm'® which is dif-
ficulty to bear’.

nj Dr. Geldner takes the whole 25" paragraph in verse form of 12 lines. Every line ends at
comma (,) and full-stop (.).

nk In the sense of English, “here”. French Voici and Persian “‘inak”’.

nl As the meaning of creation, the word dami also occurs in the Gathas; see yasna 43.5; yasna
51.1. Also in the same meaning there occurs “dam”; see yasna 71.6; yasht VI.2; the meaning of
dami also means “wisdom” (see paragraph 36 of this yasht) and dami-data (Behram yasht, para
54; Ashishvangh Yasht, para 60).

nm Its significance seems to be; to the souls of the righteous people Khordad and Amardad Am-
shaspands render assistance in giving happiness in Heaven, see Ha of the Gathas-yasna Ha
32.15; yasna Ha 45.5.

nn For comparison, see Yazishna Ha 28.11; yazishna Ha 30.4.


--- Page 128 ---

112 KHORDEH AVESTA

baéshazanam. Jasa me avanghe Mazda, jasa me avanghe Mazda, jasa
me avanghe Mazda, Amahe hutashtahe huraodhahe, verethraghnahe
ahura-dhatahe, vanaintyaoscha uparatato, Spentahecha Armatoish.””

(28) Armaiticha Spentaya”” aésham?! tbaéshd” schindayadhwem”;
pairi ushi®* varayadhwem”; ham’ gava* nidarezayadhwem”; ham”?
zanva*' zem-bayadhwem™; aipi*> derezvanem™ darezavayadhwem*.
Kat** ashava*’ Mazda*® vanat® drvantem*. Ashava‘! vanat® drujim*,
ashava“ vanat* drvantem*.

(28) Through Spandarmad” you cut asunder’? their”! (i.e. of wicked men)
malice”, cover”® all around” (their) minds” (i.e. darken), bind ye”? together?’
(their) both the hands”, bruise ye® (their) knees*! (and) "’fetter** (them) with
fetters**.

Explanation:- (Here it is not known as to who speaks in this way and to
whom he speaks, but it appears that the Prophet Zarathushtra addresses his
disciples).

O Hormazd**! will the righteous’? (man) “smite? the follower of
untruth” (i.e. wicked and sinful man)? The answer:- (Yes) the righteous“!
(man) shall smite* the Druj**; the righteous’ (man) shall smite** the
follower-of-untruth”® (i.e. wicked-sinful man).

Ushi' Ahurahe Mazdao? yazamaidie*, darethrai‘ manthrahe
spentahe®; khratim® Ahurahe Mazdao’ yazamaide’, marethrai’
manthrahe spentahe’; hizvam' Ahurahe Mazdao’ yazamaide",
fravakai'* manthrahe spentahe'; aom” gairim” yazamaide'’, yim’? ushi-
dam” ushi-daranem”', paiti” asni®? paiti* kshafne*, yasd-beretabyo”
zaothrabyo”’.

We praise? the Divine-Intelligence' of (the Creator) Ahura-Mazda’ “for
comprehending* the Holy Word’. We praise® the Divine-Wisdom® of Ahura
Mazda’ for remembering’ the Holy Word'®. We praise’? the Divine-tongue"!
of Ahura Mazda’? for reciting'* the Holy Word'®. We praise'® this'®
Mountain’’ which” is “Ushi-Darena, the giver of intelligence*®, every” day”

no For the translation of this para, see page 19 and (do thou cause me to reach the help) of
Spandarmad (Spentahecha Armatdish).

np Bind or seal their tongues (Prof. Darmesteter). This savant compares the word “derezvan”
with Pahlavi “huzvan” (Zaban).

nq This sentence is quoted here in the Later Avesta form from the Gathas (yasna Ha 48.2).
nr Or for keeping in mind; original meaning for grasping.

ns The Mount “Ushi-Darena” is situated in the province of “Sajestan” in the Eastern direction of
Iran, which is called in Avesta “Vaekereta”, and it was called by the ancient Greek people as
“Drangiana”. In Pahlavi this Mount is known as “Hush-dashtar”. The original meaning of this
word is “keeper of intelligence”. This name was given for the reason that from that Mountain
Holy Zarathushtra received the Divine intelligence; on that mountain the Holy Prophet con-
versed with Ahura Mazda as regards religious matters. In the Yazisha Ha First the Holy Scrip-


--- Page 129 ---

HORMAZD YASHT 113

(and) every™ night®, with libations?’ brought for the Consecration of the

yazishn”®.

(29) Aat! aokhta? Zarathushtrd?, upat thwa azem* maire’
anudadhayat’, Spentayao Armatidish’ dodithrabya"  avastrayat'?
"“mairyo”. (30) Hazangrem baéshazanam, baévare baéshazanam;
hazangrem baéshazanam, baévare  baéshazanim; hazangrem
baéshazanam, baévare baéshazanam.

Ahe?> narsh” ashaond”’ fravashim’® yazamaide”, yo* Asmo-
khvanvao"' nima™. Adhat® anyaésham™ ashaonim* frakhshti** yazai’’,
fravareta®® gaokerenahe® sirahe*’ Mazda-dhatahe*!. Gaokerenem®”
sirem*® Mazda-dhatem“ yazamaide*. (31) Ushi Ahurahe Mazdao
yazamaide, darethrai manthrahe spentahe; khratim Ahurahe Mazdao
yazamaide, marethrai manthrahe spentahe; hizvam Ahurahe Mazdao
yazamaide, fravakai manthrahe spentahe; aom gairlIm yazamaide, yim
ushi-dam ushi-darenem, paiti asni paiti khshafne, yasd-beretabyd

zaothrabyo.™ Ashem Vohi 1. (Recite three times).

(30) We worship” the Fravashi”® of that’® righteous?’ man”*, who*° (was)
"’Asmo-khvanvant*! by name*. I worship*’ (the Fravashi of that person
called Asmo-khvanvant) more than other righteous (persons) as a lover of
the powerful*” "’Gaokerena (i.e. White Haoma). We praise* the powerful
Gaokerena” created by Hormazd™.

(32) Damim! yazamaide? yam? Armaitim spentam’. Yehe® dathre’
ashahecha’, ashaonam’, asha-paoiryanamcha” “damanam".

(32) "We praise’ wisdom! which? is the bountiful’ perfect (mentality)*

whose® mental endowment creation’ of (Hormazd/is creation’! of
righteousness’) and of the righteous’ (people) who (are) most righteous!”.”

tures of the Zoroastrian Religion are revered with this Mount.

nt This paragraph is complicated. Instead of “upa thwa azem maire anudadhayat”, Prof.
Darmesteter approving the reading ““Zamerena duye” given in the footnote translates as under;
“O sinner! (i.e. O Ahriman!) I will throw thee back into the earth”. “By means of the two eyes"
of Spenta’ Armaiti'®.”

nu For its translation, see this Yasht, verse 28.

nv The name of “Asmo-khvanvant” comes first amongst those famous men and women whose
Fravashis are revered in the Fravartin yasht, kardas 25-27. Prof. Darmesteter regards this per-
sonage as one of the first disciples of the Prophet Zarathushtra.

nw For the explanation of “Gaokerena” see the notes given in my translation of the Vendidad,
fargard XX, para 4.

nx Words from “Damim yazamaide” up to “asha-paoirynamcha damanam” also occur in
Vispered Kardah XIX para 2.

ny Or alternately:- We praise” the bountiful’ perfect mentality’ (or politeness) which’ (is) the
creation! (of Hormazd).

nz The reason for praising wisdom and perfect mindedness is, that its origin arises from right-


--- Page 130 ---

114 KHORDEH AVESTA

Aétat dim vispanim mazishtem dazdyai, ahimcha ratimcha yim
Ahurem Mazdam, snathai angrahe mainyéush drvato, snathai aéshmahe
khravi-draosh, snathai mazainyanim daevanam, snathai vispanam
daévanam, varenyanamcha drvatam. (To recite in baz:) Shekasteh
ghanamenyo, bar ahereman leanat sad hazar bar. (To recite aloud:)
Fradathai Ahurahe Mazdao raévatd khvarenanguhato, fradathai
Ameshanim Spentanam. Fradathai Tishtryehe stard  raévatd
khvarenanguhatd, fradathai narsh ashaond, fradathai vispanaim
spentahe mainyeush damanam “ashaondam. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmai raéshcha; Hazangrem: Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Roz nek nam, Roz pak nam, Roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan), namaz Dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra
Ahurana Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat
vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohii 1.

Gorje khoreh awzayad Dadar Ahura Mazda rayOmand khorehmand
mimo0an mino beretiim, berasad amavand pirozgar amavandi pirozgart.
Dad din beh mazdayasnan, agahi ravai goafarangani bad hafte keshvar
zamin; aediin bad. Man Ano Avayad shudan, man ano Avayad shudan,
man 4no Avayad shudan. Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

(Facing the South) Dadare gehan dine mazdayasni dade Zarathushti.
Nemase-te ashaum seévishte Aredvi Sura Anahite ashaone. Ashem Vohi
1.

Nem urvaire vanguhi mazdadhate ashaone. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahurem Mazdam_ raévantem khvarenanguhantem yazamaide.
Ashem Vohi 1.

Dadar Ahura Mazda rayOmand khorehmand mm6d4n min6 beretim
berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

NIRANG OF HORMAZD YASHT

(Note: This Nirang should be recited three times after the recital of
Hormazd Yasht.)

Ya! Dadar Ahura Mazda’, ahereman? marochinidar* negunam*®
divan®; bar’ bidane?® rastakhiz’ tan pasin'’ bigumanam. Ashem Vohii 1.
(recite three times).

eousness itself, and from the people who are most righteous. The meaning of Grmaiti is also
“virtuous thought, humility”. Sanskrit dramati.

oa For the translation of this paragraph, see Hoshbam, page 21-22.

ob This nirang as well as “nirangs” of other yashts are in Pazend.


--- Page 131 ---

NIRANG OF HORMAZD YASHT 115

O' Creator Hormazd*! I overthrow Ahriman*, the destroyer* of
righteousness (and) the demons®; I am absolutely, without doubt'’, on the
(path of) Rastakhez (i.e. Resurrection of the Dead) (and) Tanpasin (i.e. the
final existence).

HAFTAN YASHT LARGE
Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdan Ahura Mazda Khod&e awazini gorje khoreh
awazayad, Haft Ameshaspand berasad.”

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdio, tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
haithyavarshtém hyat vasna ferashOtemem; staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohii
3.

Fravarane mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. (1) Ahurahe Mazdao®
raévato’ khvarenanguhato®*, Ameshanam Spentanam’, Vanghave
Mananghe” akhshtodish" ham-vaintya0”, taradhato'’ anyaish"* daman"*,
asnahe khrathvo'® Mazdadhatahe'’’, gaosho-sritahe khrathvo"™
Mazdadhatahe’. (2) Ashahe Vahishtahe” sraéshtahe”, Airyaman6
Ishyehe” siirahe* Mazdadhatahe™ Saokayao* vanghuyao” vouru-
doithrayao?’ Mazda-dhatayao* ashaonyd4o”, Khshathrahe vairyehe*®
ayokhshustahe*! marezdikai thrayd drigaove**. (3) Spentayao
vanghuyao Armatodish*4, ratayao** vanghuyao* vouru-ddithrayao”’
Mazda-dhatayao* ashaonyao”*, MHaurvatato“’ rathvo*! yairyayao”
hushitdish*, saredhaéibyo* ashahe* ratuby6“, Ameretato*”’ rathvo*
fshaonibya® vathvabya™. aspinibya*! yaonibya” gaokerenahe® sirahe™
Mazdadhatahe™.

(Recite during Havan Gah as well as Second Havan Gah as under):-

(4) Mithrahe® vouru-gaoyaotoish*’, Ramanascha khvastrahe™.

(If Gah be Rapithwan, recite as under):-

Ashahe vahishtahe® Athrascha® Ahurahe Mazdao".

(If Gah be Uzirin, recite as under):-

Berezat6® Ahurahe® nafedhro™ apam® apascha® Mazdadhatayao”.

(If Gah be Aiwisruthrem, recite as under):-

oc i.e. may the Seven Ameshaspands (Bountiful Immortals) come (unto my help)!


--- Page 132 ---

116 KHORDEH AVESTA

(5) Ashaunam® fravashinam® ghenanamcha” virdvathwanam”
yairyayaoscha” hushitdish*, amahecha™ hutashtahe™ huraodhahe’”,
verethraghnahecha” Ahuradhatahe”, vanaintyaoscha uparatato”.

(If Gah be Ushahen, recite as under):-

Sraoshahe® ashyehe*! ashivat6”, verethrajano® fradat-gaéthahe™,
Rashnaosh*® razishtahe*, Arshtatascha®’ fradat-gaethayao* varedat-
gaethayao”.

Khshnaothra”®  yasnaicha®' vahmaicha” khshnao _ thraicha”™
frasastayaécha™; yatha Ahi Vairy0*> zaota®® fra-me” mrite’, atha
ratush ashatchit hacha” fra ashava!” vidhvao™ mraoti!™.

(1) For the pleasure” (of the Creator Ahura Mazda) (during so and so
Gah), keeper of the treasures’ (and) Glorious*, of the Ameshaspands?’
(Bountiful Immortals’), of the victorious” friendship" (or of peace’ full of
love'”) of Bahman’® (Ameshaspand) (who is) superior’? to other'* creatures!°
(and. who is the lord) of the innate wisdom’* (and) of the wisdom!'® acquired
through the ear'® created by Ahura Mazda’, (2) of the fairest”! Ardibehesht
(Ameshaspand)”, of the mighty”’ (and) beloved Airyaman (yazata)” created
by Ahura Mazda”, of the righteous”? (and) “‘large-eyed”’ (and) the good
Saoka (yazata)”*, created by Ahura Mazda’; of Sheherevar (Ameshaspand)*°
(ruling over) the pure metal*', who is merciful* (and) the nourisher of the
poor*’; (3) of the good Spandarmad (Ameshaspand)** (who is) righteous*
large-eyed*’ (and) the good** bestower*, of Khordad* (who is) the lord of
the coming of the season” at its proper time*’ from amongst the Saredha (i.e.
years) which are the periods of holiness*; and of Amardad
(Ameshaspand)*’ (who is) the lord over the prosperity” of the flocks* (of
cattle) and over the increase*'! of corns” (and) over the efficacious™
Gaokerena (i.e. White Hom) created by Ahura Mazda*, (4) (during Havan
Gah) of Meher (yazata)** of wide pastures*’ and of “Rama Khvastar*’,
(during Rapithwan Gah) of Ardibehesht Ameshaspand” and of the Fire® of
Ahura Mazda", (during Uzirin Gah): of the Navel™ of waters® (who is) the
exalted” lord’ and of the waters® created by Ahura Mazda‘’, (during
Aiwisruthrema Gah); of the Fravashis® of the righteous (people)® and of
women” with their troops of horses”, and of the coming of the season” at its
proper time”, of (the yazata) Ama”™, well-shaped’? and beautiful’, of
Beheram (yazata) created by Ahura Mazda’, and of (the yazata named)
Vananti Uperatat; (during Ushahen Gah); of Srosh (yazata)*°, the righteous*’
possessed of righteousness*, victorious*’ and bringing prosperity to the
world™, of the most just®® Rashne (yazata)*, and of Ashtad (yazata)*’, the
increaser of the world®’ and prosperity-bringer of the world*- for the

od i.e. with eyes of love; original meaning of “large eyes”.

oe This yazata-angel is presiding over atmosphere and over (pleasure) the days of merriment,
feasts.


--- Page 133 ---

HAFTAN YASHT LARGE 117

worship (of these all), for (their) praise”, for (their) propitiation®’ (and) glori-
fication” may the Zaotar” (i.e. officiating priest)” proclaim’ before me*’
(the excellences of the verses of) Yatha Ahi Vairy6*; (the Raspi who is)
righteous'” and learned!*! may proclaim'” (the excellences of these verses)
atha ratush ashat-chit hacha”.

(6) Ahurem Mazdam! raévantem? khvarenan guhantem’ yazamaide‘;
Amesha Spenta* hukhshathra® hudhaongho’ yazamaide*®; Vohu Mano?’
Ameshem Spentem'’® yazamaide"; Akhshtim’”  ham-vaintim’
yazamaide", taradhatem'’ anyaish'® daman'; Aasnem  khratim™
Mazdadhatem” yazamaide”’; gaoshd-sritem khratim”' Mazdadhatem”
yazamaide”. (7) Ashem Vahishtem™ sraéshtem* Ameshem Spentem”
yazamaide”’; Airyamanem Ishim” yazamaide”; sirem*’ Mazdadhatem*!
yazamaide’; Saokam* vanguhim™ vourudodithram* Mazdadhatam*
ashaonim*’ yazamaide*; Khshathrem Vairim® Ameshem Spentem“’
yazamaide*!; ayokhshustem* yazamaide*; marezdikem“  thrayd-
drigim* yazamaide“. (8) Spentam Vanguhim Armaitim”’ yazamaide*;
ratanm®” vanguhim® vouru-doithram*' Mazdadhatam™ ashaonim*
yazamaide™“; Haurvatatem™® Ameshem Spentem*® yazamaide*’;
yairyam® hushitim® yazamaide”; saredha” ashavana® ashahe® ratavo™
yazamaide®; Ameretatem® Ameshem Spentem®”  yazamaide®;
fshaonim® vathwam” yazamaide”'; aspinacha” yevind” yazamaide”™;
Gaokerenem” sirem” Mazdadhatem” yazamaide”.

(6) We Praise’ (the Creator) Ahura Mazda', keeper of the treasures’ (and)
glorious; we praise’ Ameshaspands*, benevolent (good-ruling)® (and)
possessing good faculty’; we praise'’ Bahman’ Ameshaspand”’; we praise’*
the victorious’* friendship’? (or peace’? full of love'*) which is superior'> to
other’® creatures'’; we praise? the innate wisdom!’ created by Ahura
Mazda”; we praise” the wisdom acquired through the ear', created by
Ahura Mazda”. (7) We praise?’ the fairest*> Ardibehesht™ Ameshaspand”*;
we praise” the beloved Airyaman (yazata)*; we praise” the mighty
(Airyaman yazata)*° created by Ahura Mazda*'; we praise*® the righteous*’
(and) large-eyed** (and) the good** Saoka (yazata)**, created by Ahura
Mazda**; we praise Sheherevar*? Ameshaspand“; we praise*’ (presiding over)
the pure metal”; (Sheherevar) the merciful’ (and) the nourisher of the
poor*.

(8) We praise*® the good Spandarmad (Ameshaspand)*’ the righteous”,
large-eyed*! bestower’’, created by Ahura Mazda; we praise*’ Khordad®
Ameshaspand®; we praise” the timely advent® of the season**; the holy”
Saredha®’ (i.e. years) (which are) the periods™ of holiness®; we praise®
Amardad® Ameshaspand®’; we praise’! the prosperity” of the flocks” (of
cattle); and the abundance” of corns”; and also the efficacious’ Gaokerena
(i.e. the White Hom)” created by Ahura Mazda”.


--- Page 134 ---

118 KHORDEH AVESTA

(During Havan Gah as well as Second Havan, recite as under):-

(9) Mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitim yazamaide; Rama khvastrem yaza-
maide. Ashaunam vanguhish sird4o spentao fravashayd yazamaide.”

(If Gah be Rapithwan, then recite as under):-

Ashem vahishtem ataremcha Ahurahe Mazdao puthrem yazamaide.
Ashaunaém vanguhish sirdao spentao fravashayd yazamaide.

(If Gah be Uzirin, then recite as under):-

Berezantem ahurem khshathrim khshaétem apaim napatem aurvat-
aspem yazamaide; apemcha Mazdadhatam ashaonim yazamaide.”
Ashaunaém vanguhish surao spentao fravashayd yazamaide.

(If Gah be Aiwisruthrema, recite as under):-

(10) Ashaunam vanguhish sirao spentéo fravashayd yazamaide;
ghenaoscha i vird-vanthwao yazamaide; yairyamcha  hushitim
yazamaide; amemcha hutashtem huraodhem yazamaide;
yerethraghnemcha Ahuradhatem yazamaide; vanaintimcha uparatatem
yazamaide." Ashaunaim vanguhish sirao spentao  fravashayd
yazamaide.

(If Gah be Ushahen, recite as under):-

Sraoshem ashim huraodhem  verethrajanem  fradat-gaéthem
ashavanem ashahe ratiim yazamaide; Rashniim razishtem yazamaide;
Arshtatemcha fradat-gaétham varedat-gaétham yazamaide.” Ashaunam
vanguhish sirao spentao fravashayd yazamaide.

(11) “Yatu zt Zarathushtra vanat daévd mashyo. KO nmanahe badha
Spitama Zarathushtra, vispa drukhsh janaiti, vispa drukhsh nashiiti,
yatha haonaoiti aésham vacham. (12) Aoi te aoi tanvo dadhiaiti, aoi te
athaurunem jandaiti, athaurunem yatha rathaéshtarem, vispand
asrushtee nashatanam aojangha. yO him daste daranem, ydi hapta
Ameshao Spenta hukhshathra hudhaonghd hamarethanamchit. Daénam
mazdayasnim, asp0d-kehrpem Apem Mazdadhatéam  ashaonim
yazamaidie. (13) Atare vitare maibya vitare maibyd vimraot
Zarathushtra. atare vitare maibyaschit vitare maibyaschit vimraot

of In this yasht the last sentence recited in all the Gahs is not given in the Avesta Editions of
Prof. Westergaard and Dr. Geldner, but it is in the Parsee prayer-books.

og For its translation, see Uzirin Gah.
oh For its translation, see Aiwisruthrema Gah, pages 102-103.
oi For its translation, see Ushahen Gah, page 106.

oj I could not give the authentic translation of the Avesta passages (11-14) of this Small Haftan
yasht, being (corrupt) not genuine. Translations of European scholars are also not satisfactory,
but I have attempted to give some synopsis of passages 11-12.


--- Page 135 ---

HAFTAN YASHT LARGE 119

Zarathushtra; yat vanghéush manangho, yat aithyejanghem vacham,
fraspavaresh fracha framerethwacha frajathwacha. (14) Satavata sate-
vata utavate ute-vata uta apa-barentu yatha bastem fravashnam
daénam mazdayasnim nashatanam aojangha. Ashem Vohi 1.

Note:- (If Small Haftan yasht be recited, kardah of “Yatu Zi
Zarathushtra” up to the end Ashem Vohiti | inclusive should be recited seven
times and then having recited in “baz” the entire portion of “Ahura Mazda
Khodae awaziini mardum .... aedtin bad” and Yatha Ahi Vairyo 2, one must
recite the remaining portion of this yasht from the portion Yasnemcha up to
the end (Haft Ameshaspand berasad. Ashem Vohi 1). But if one wants to
recite Haftan Yasht Large, the Kardah of “Yatu Zi Zarathushtra” up to
Ashem Vohi 1, should be recited only once and then one should recite the

below-mentioned 8 Kardas).

(11) O Zarathushtra! It would be better if the sorcerer and man of devilish
temperament be really smitten and broken! O Spitaman Zarathushtra! Who
(is) that man when he recites these sacred verses (of Avesta), every druj from
his house is indeed smitten and destroyed? (12) The druj “attacks thy body
and smites thy priest-and the warrior. The man who keeps a shield against
his enemies the Ameshaspands, the (benevolent) possessing good sense (is
fully capable) “'to oppose the °"drujas by means of his strength. We praise the
Mazda-worshipping Religion and the “swiftly-flowing undefiled water
created by Ahura-Mazda.°°

°>(Kardah 1) (1) Ahurem Mazdam! ashavanem’ ashahe? ratim‘ yaza-
maide*; Amesha Spenta® hukhshathra’ hudhaonghd* yazamaide’; vis-
pam” ashaono" stim’ yazamaide’ mainyevimcha’ gaéthyamcha",
bereja’® vanghéush"” ashahe'’, bereja!? daénayao” vanghuyao”! mazda-
yasnOish”.

(2) “humatanam® hikhtanam™“ hvarshtanam*, yadacha”

ok The root of aoi dadhaiti is avi-da = Sanskrit abhi-dha, to attack.

ol The original meaning of “‘nashatanam’’ is, “of those fit to be destroyed” (nash-ata).

sa”?

om The original meaning of “asrushtée” is “for not hearing, for not obeying”.

on The original meaning of “asp6 kehrpem” is the “shape of a horse”, see Tir yasht, karda 5,
para 8.

oo The translation of this entire Karda does not seem to me to be satisfactory. A better transla-
tion than this should be made. I could not translate the portion from “Aatare vitare” up to
“aojangha” of paras 13-14.

op Eight kardas of this yasht are taken from yasna Ha 35 to Ha 42. This part is called ““Yasna
Haptanghaiti”; and it is believed that this part is written between the age of the Gathas and the
yasna. Its composition is poetic prose. The meaning of “haptanghaiti” is seven Has ( haptan +
haiti). Ha 42 seems to have been added as an appendix.

oq As it occurs in every Gatha, this paragraph of “humatanam” comes at the end of Kardah 7 of
the same yasht (which in fact should be at the end of this yasht); from this Prof. Darmesteter


--- Page 136 ---

120 KHORDEH AVESTA

anyadacha’’, verezyamnanamcha” vaverezananamcha” mah? aibti-
jaretaro*' naénaéstaro”, yathana® vohunam*™ mahi. (Recite twice).

(3) Tat at?’ vairimaid?’® Ahura Mazda” asha* srira*! hyat® i*
mainimadicha“, vaochdimacha*, verezimacha”, ya*  hatam”
shyaothananam™ vahishta khyat*' ubdibya*® ahubya™. (4) Gavoi™
adaish*® taish** shyaothanaish*’ yaish® vahishtaish® °fraéshyamahi™
ramacha" vastremcha” dazdyai®, surunvatascha™ asurunvatashca®
khshayantascha® akhshayantascha”.

(1) We praise> Ahura Mazda' the Lord of Righteousness’; we praise?’
Ameshaspands® (who are) good-ruling’, possessing good sense*; with the
wish’ of good” righteousness'* “and good Mazda-worshipping” Religion”,
we praise’ the entire’? worldly’ and spiritual’* creations’? of the Righteous"
(Ahura Mazda), (in the same way) we are*’ the glorifiers*’ and meditators”
of the doers”® of good thoughts™, good words” and good deeds” and of those
who have performed” (good deeds) for this world?® and for the yonder
world?’. (3) O Righteous” and fair*! Ahura Mazda! We choose*® those®
which’ are*! the best® (deeds) amongst the deeds” of the existing ones*® for
both” the worlds® (i.e. for gaining happiness of both the worlds), we ponder
over our minds“, we speak* (in conformity with them) and act* (in
accordance with them).

Explanation:- Having chosen the best deeds, and the virtuous path
(followed by) righteous men and having applied our full mind to them, we
(wish to) keep our thoughts, words and deeds in conformity with them.

(4) We who are the learners of the knowledge of the religion™ and the
“unlearners®, the potent® and the impotent®’ (powerful and powerless)
wish” to give® happiness*! (to ourselves) (and) the “pastures” for (our)
cattle™ through charity® and best® deeds*’.

(5) °Hukhshathrotemai® bat” khshathrem”, ahmat” hyat”? aibi-
dademahicha™, chishmahicha”, havanmahicha” hyat” Mazdai Ahurai”,

(considering the prefatory portion of the first para beginning with “Ahurem Mazdam as
Khshnuman’’) wants to regard the beginning of this Ha from “Humatanam”,, i.e. as the first para.
Moreover, this and other verses recited twice in this yasht are called “bish4mruta” - bish (twice)
+ amruta = recited, spoken. As regards those verses which are recited twice, see Vendidad
fargard X. 3-4.

or As regards purifying the cattle, words from “gav6i” up to “fraeshyamaht”’ is quoted in
Vendidad XI, para 6.

Os i.e. owing to the immense love of truth and religion.
ot Original meaning; “listeners as well as non listeners”, root sru = Sanskrit sru.

ou In the olden times of the Avesta, wealth of men was counted from the number of cattle, and
for their safety, pasture is the most essential item.

ov This para is called thrishamrita (thrish + amriita), i.e. verses recited three times; for the ex-
planation, see Vendidad fargard X, paras 7-8.


--- Page 137 ---

HAFTAN YASHT LARGE 121

ashaicha” vahishtai*® (Recite three times).

(6) Yatha®! at® uta® na* va* nairi® va*’ vaéda®* haithim® atha” hat”!
vohu” tat® é-eadi™, verezyotiicha™, it ahmai”’ fracha vatoyotu’® it”
aéibyo' yoi' it? atha* verezyan‘, yatha it asti>.

(7) Ahurahya® zi’ at® ve? Mazdao” yasnemcha"! vahmemcha”
vahishtem'? amehmaidi géushcha'> vastrem’’. Tat at!’ vé'® verezya-
mahi”, fracha vateyamahi” ya”! te” isamaide”’.

(8) Ashaya”™ dat* sairl’’, ashahya”’ verezene”*, kahmaichit” hatam*°
jijisham*! vahishtam® ada® ubodibya* ahubya*. (Recite twice).

(9) Ima** at?” ukhdha** vachao”, Ahura Mazda“, ashem*! manaya”
vahehya*® fravaochama“: thwam* at*® aésham*’ paityastaremcha®
fradakhshtaremcha” dademaide™.

(10) Ashaatcha hacha vanghéushcha mananghd, vanghéushcha
khshathrat, staotaish thwat Ahura staotdiby0, aibt ukhdha thwat
ukhdhOiby6, yasna thwat yasndibyd.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tascha taoscha yazamaide.

(5) (May there) verily” be the kingdom”' to the best Ruler® (i.e. to Ahura
Mazda)! We dedicate our mind’ to Ahura Mazda’ Who” (Himself) is*
supreme Righteousness”, we acknowledge (Him)” and regard (Him) as our
own’”®,

(6) Also® if? (any) man® or®® woman* really knows** some good

things”, “let him declare” them”, let him practise them, (and) inculcate”
them® upon (those)”’ others'® who wish to act* properly*® in that manner?
(accordingly).

(7) We regard" as best'? (O man and woman!) for you’ the worship'' and
praise’? of (the Creator) Ahura Mazda®'®, and the nurture’® of the cattle’.
According to our wish?'*? we (ourselves) practise’? this'’ (matter) verily’®
and inculcate them upon” (others).

(8) (Remaining) in the chieftainship*’ or in the “practice of
righteousness if any person”, amongst the existing ones*’, desires to live the
best® life in both™ the worlds*, (he should then be) generous®.

ow Original meaning, “let him speak orally”. For its explanation, see my Avesta dictionary p.
118 under the word “é-eadu”.

ox Or “as it is” (Yatha it asti). Original meaning: “that” which”! we wish” (ve = va = Sanskrit
va, indeed, verily). To me the translation of the last sentence (tat at ....... isamaide) does not
seem to be satisfactory.

oy English meaning of the word “verezene” is “practice” and is akin to Persian “varzesh”.


--- Page 138 ---

122 KHORDEH AVESTA

Explanation By remaining in the chieftainship of righteousness and by
leading the life in accordance with (the principles of) righteousness, the
person who gives help to the poor people according to his own capacity will
enjoy the happiness of both the worlds.

(9) O Ahura Mazda! (Keeping) “in mind” the righteousness, we
proclaim“ these*® praise-worthy** verses* in (the better) suitable manner*’;
we appoint” Thee* as the listener*® and as the teacher of these (verses)*”.

(9) “O Ahura Mazda! On account of Thy righteousness, good mind and
good sovereignty, Thy praise is superior to all other praises, hymns of Thy
glory are superior to all other hymns of glory, and Thy adoration is superior

2 pa

to all other adorations”’.

(Kardah II) (1) "’Ahya! thwa? athrd? verezena‘ paouruye® pairi-
jasamaide’, Mazda Ahura’ thwa*® thwa’ mainyu spénishta", ye!” a's
akhtish“ ahmai® yém’’ akhtoy6" daonghe™.

(2) Urvazishto"® hvo” na” yataya"'; paiti-jamyao” atare’> Mazdao™
Ahurahya*, urvazishtahya*® urvazaya”’ namishtahya* nemangha”
nao”; mazishtai*! yaongham~” paiti® jamyao*. (3) Atarsh®5 voi* Mazdao
Ahurahya*®’ ahi**, mainyéush® voi ahya*! spénishtd*” ahi, hyat** va*
toi’ namanam” vazishtem*, atare* Mazdao Ahurahya*™, ta‘! thwa?
pairi-jasamaide™.

(1) (The reciter says:) Through (the "agency* of this' fire’, O most
beneficent!! Spirit!” Ahura Mazda’! We first approach® Thee® and "Thee?
only. Thou takest away'*'* (O Fire!) (that) filthiness'* to whom'® the
filthiness’’ (is attached) i.e. You are the purifier of all evils.

Explanation: (Like the wind and the water, the fire also is a source of
purification. Besides, the words “Fire” in English and, Pur in the Greek
Language are derived from Sanskrit root pu=to purify).

oz The locative singular of the word mana becomes manaya, manaya (Gathic form).

pa Spiegel; Harlez also has translated more or less similarly. Prof. Darmesteter translates this
para as:- O Ahura Mazda! Thy praise is superior to the praises of Asha. Vohu Manah and the
Good Khshathra, rather superior to every (other) praise. The sacred verses which are addressed
to Thee as an appeal are superior to all other sacred verses, and the gift which is dedicated to
Thee is superior to all other gifts.

pb This paragraph is quoted in Vendidad fargard 11, para 4.
pe “Through the service of the fire”, (Spiegal and Harlez)

pd For better impression, the word “thee” seems to occur twice. Professor Darmesteter has re-
ferred the First “thee” to the visible Fire and the second “thee” to the spiritual fire in the proxim-
ity of the Creator Hormazd on the basis of the Pahlavi translation.

pe Sanskrit root da means “to give”: Sanskrit 4-da means “to take away, to remove”. “Thou (O
Fire!) ill-treats him who ill treats the Fire”. (Darmesteter), “Who brings pollution to this (Thy
flame) wilt Thou cover him with pollution (in your turn).” Dr. Geldner has taken “akhtoy6i” in-
stead of “akhtdyo”.


--- Page 139 ---

HAFTAN YASHT LARGE 123

(2) (That) man”? himself’? (is) most pleased'** of the power’ of this
means (fire) (i.e. the Worship of Fire’? is the means of (reaching) Ahura
Mazda. O Fire*? of Ahura Mazda™***! mayest thou reach (us) with the joy”’ of
the most joyous”® (and) with the homage” of the most glorious**: mayest
thou "reach* (us) for the greatest (work)*! of the works. (O Fire!) thou art®
the most bountiful* ""Emblem* of that‘! Spirit? (i.e. the Creator Ahura
Mazda). O Fire* of Ahura Mazda*! thy** (one name) amongst the names*’
(is) "’Vazishta**. Through the agency of that (name)*' we may reach® Thee”,
(O Ahura Mazda!)

(4) Vohu™ thwa* manangha**, vohu*®’ thwa** asha®, vanghuyao”
thwa® chistdish® shyaothanadishcha® vachebishcha™ pairi-jasamaide®.
Nemakhyamahi®, ishuidyamahi”, thwa°’ Mazda Ahura®: vispaish”
thwa” humataish”, vispaish” hikhtaish” vispaish”® hvarshtaish”® pairi-
jasamaide”. (6) Sraéshtam”™ at” toi®* kehrpem* kehrpam™ avaédaya-
maht®, Mazda Ahura*, ima®* raochao® barezishtem®’ barezemanaim®
avat® yat” hvare”! avachi”.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

4. (O Ahura Mazda!) we approach® Thee® with good™ mind*® with
righteousness** with the deeds® and words™ of good® wisdom”. O Ahura
Mazda! we bow to Thee®, we are indebted®’ (to Thee). We may approach”
Thee”! with all” good thoughts”, good words”, (and) good deeds’®. O Ahura
Mazda! 'We declare® this” Thy® body*!, (i.e. Sun) the fairest’ of all
bodies®: this* light** amongst the highest (lights)** which” is called” the
sun’!.

(Kardah II) (1) "Itha' at? yazamaide? Ahurem Mazdam‘, yé>
gamcha® ashemcha’ dat’, apascha’? dat!’ urvaraoscha" vanguhish”,
raochaoscha’ dat’! bimimcha's vispacha'’® *vohi’’. (2) Ahya’®
khshathracha!” mazénacha” hvapanghaishcha”' tem” at yasnanam”™
paurvatata®> yazamaide”; yor” géush”* hacha” shyeinti*’. (3) Tem*! at”
ahuirya® nameni‘ mazdavara* spentotema* yazamaide*’, tem**®
ahmakaish” azdibishcha” ushtanaischa*! yazamaide”, tem*® ashaunam“
fravashish*® naramcha“ nairinamcha” yazamaide®.

pf i.e. O Fire of Ahura Mazda! do Thou help us fulfilling whatever desires we have.

=

pg If we take the word “voi” as equivalent of Sanskrit “vai” = indeed, then, O Fire! thou art ver-
ily of Ahura Mazda, i.e. of the creation of Ahura Mazda.

ph The original meaning of “Vazishta” is “‘swiftest”. see yasna Ha 17.

pi Metaphorically the body of Ahura Mazda is given an analogy with the sun. In later books
Ahura Mazda is called the Light of Lights.

pj The first paragraph of this Ha is recited as the Baz or grace before the meals.


--- Page 140 ---

124 KHORDEH AVESTA

(4) Ashem at vahishtem®” yazamaide*, hyat*! sraéshtem”, hyat
spentem ameshem™ hyat raochoénghvat*, hyat®’ vispa*® voho°. (5)
Vohiicha” mand" yazamaide®: vohiicha® khshathrem™ vanguhimcha®
daénam®, vanguhimcha” fseratum®, vanguhimcha® armaitim”.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(1) We worship? here? in this way' (the Creator) Ahura Mazda* who*®
created® the cattle® and corn’, water’ and trees'’, the lights’? (of the sky) and
the earth’> and (above all these) all'*(other) good things'’. (2) On account of
this (i.e. Ahura Mazda’s) sovereignty’’, greatness” and intrinsic-merit”! do
we worship*> Him” with the pre-eminence? of the P‘yasnas™. (3) We
worship®” Him (Ahura Mazda)*! with (such) "names™ - Ahurian**, pleasing
the Mazda** (and) most bountiful?®. We worship’ Him with our own*
bodies*® and life*' (i.e. with heart and soul). We worship** Him (and) the
Fravashis*® of righteous men*® and women*’. (4) We worship
Ardibehesht” who*! is the fairest*? (and) brilliant** Ameshaspand™ (and) all°®
good things® (of the Creator Ahura Mazda). We praise” good” thought",
good® Sovereignty™, good® Religion®, good” ’"Fseratu®’ and good®
humility”.

(Kardah IV) (1) "Imam! dat? zim? génabish* hathra® yazamaide’, ya’
nao® baraiti’: yaoscha"” toi'' génao’ Ahura Mazda, ashat hacha™
vairyao’, tao'® yazamaide’’. (2) Izao'*, yaoshtayd’, ferashtay6”°,
armatayo”', vanguhim” abish”* ashim™, vanguhim” ishem”, vanguhim2’
aziitim”’, vanguhim” frasastim”, vanguhim*! parendim” yazamaide*.

(1) We praise® this' earth? which’ nourishes® us®* (and) Feminine Powers
and Moral Virtues* along with it*; O Ahura Mazda"! We praise!’ Feminine
Powers and Moral Virtues’? of Thine'' which'® (are) agreeable'® on account
of righteousness".

(2) We praise®* (all these) - comfort'*, purity'’®, increase’, perfect
mindedness”', along with good” humility, wish’, prosperity’®, precept*’,
(and) good*! ’°Parendi*.

(3) Apo* at* yazamaide*, maékaintishcha*”’, hébvaintishcha*
pk I cannot translate these words; ydi' géush’ hacha’ shyeinti‘ satisfactorily. Who abide beside
the “Kine”, (Mills): “Who dwell with the cattle”, (Darmesteter).
pl The details of these names are given in Hormazd yasht, paras 7-8 and 12-15.
pm i.e. Control or sovereignty over the cattle: and Khordad and Amardad.
pn This sentence is quoted in Vendidad fargard XI. 5

po Parendi is the angel presiding over riches - wealth, and is generally associated with Ashi
Vanghuhi. Similar to this word there is the Vedic “purandhi’”, the meaning of which is “wisdom,
dexterity”.


--- Page 141 ---

HAFTAN YASHT LARGE 125

fravazangho*, Ahuranish” Ahurahya", hvapanghao”,
huperethwaoscha® vio", hvdghzathaoscha*, hushnathraoscha“,
ubdibya”’ ahubya® chagema”.

(4) Uiti®® yas! ve vanguhish® Ahurd Mazdao™“ naman* dadat*;
vanghudao”’ hyat® vao* dadat®; taish®' vao* yazamaide®™, taish™
frayanmahi®, taish® nemakhyamah?”, taish® ishuidyamahi®.

(5) Apascha vao azishcha vaio matarascha vao, agenyao
dregudayanghd visp6-paitish 4vaochama, vahishtao sraéshtao ava vé
vanguhish ratdish daregobazaush nashi paiti-vyadao paiti-sendao
matard jitayd.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaetha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(3) We praise*® the waters** that are showered down*’, (gathered
together)** collected and flowed forward. (O Waters) of Ahura Mazda
(pertaining to Ahura Mazda!) We ?’regard® you“ possessing intrinsic merit”,
wide*, well-flowing* (and) the purifiers** of both” the worlds*.

(4) (Speaks to the waters): Thus’ good*? names* (mentioned above)
which*! (the Creator) Ahura Mazda*™ gave*® you’. He who* is the Giver of
good’ (the Creator Ahura Mazda) fixed® these*® (names) for you*’. (O Ahura
Mazda!) through the agency of these (names)*' we worship® Thee”. With
these (names)™ we praise® (Thee). We bow down’ (to Thee) (and) with
these (names) we are indebted (to Thee).”

(Kardah V) (1) Itha' at? yazamaide> géush* urvanecha*
tashanemcha’®, ahmakéng’ dat® urund’ pasukanamcha"™, yoi'' nao”
jijishenti's, yaéibyascha" toi!’ a’ yaécha"”’ aéibyo 4'* anghen”. (2) Daiti-
kanamcha” aidyunam?! hyat” urund” yazamaide™; ashaunam’” Aat”®
urund?” yazamaide’*, kudod-zatanamchit” naramcha* nairinamcha*!

pp By praising water and singing its excellence we acquire many advantages; for all living
creatures water is the most essential thing. Reverend Mills has translated the various types of
waters occurring in the third paragraph as under:- You that are showered down, you that stand in
pools and vats**, you that bear forth (our loaded vessels)’, you that serve us all in helpful
ways”, well-forded”, full flowing”, effective or effective for bathing”. For further details, see
the note at the end of the translation of the fourth paragraph.

pq Sometimes in the Gathas as an honorific the pronoun for Ahura Mazda comes in plural in-
stead of in singular. Dr. Spiegel and Prof. Harlez apply the word “vao” (= you) to the water.

pr I do not understand the portion from “apascha vao azishcha vao” up to “matard jitayo”.
Translation by others do not seem to me to be satisfactory. Prof. Darmesteter on the basis of the
Pahlavi Bundahishn and from the standpoint of its translation given considers some words oc-
curring in the third and fifth paragraphs of this Ha as seventeen kinds of waters and fluids in all;
such as maékaintishcha = waters or juices that are in the plants; hebavaintischa = water that
flows from the mountains; fravazahgh6 = rain water; ahuranish = well water and still water, etc.
The above meanings are not derived from Avestan words.


--- Page 142 ---

126 KHORDEH AVESTA

yaésham™ vahehish® daénao* vanainti*> va**, venghen*’ va**, vaonare”®
va". (3) At*! itha” yazamaide* vanghishcha® it* vanguhishcha* 1t*’;
spenténg ameshéng*® yevaéjyO” yavaésvo™", yois' vanghéush 4
manangho™ shyeinti®, yaoscha™ witi*.

(1) Thus here we worship the *soul’ of the universe’ and (its) fashioner®,

(and) the souls? of the cattle'® as well’, who"! (the cattle) desire to "live’’ for
us"; for (us)'* they’, and (we)'’ are’® for them’®.

Explanation:- (For the sake of man, the care of cattle is taken; and
through cattle men get nourishment. Both of them are useful to each other).

(2) ""We worship” the souls” of the travellers and” the cavaliers”'. Here”
we worship” the souls’ of the righteous” men*’ and women” born at any
time” who revere’, or** will revere*’ or®® have revered” the better laws*. (3)
Thus” we praise here*! good men“ and women” (and) the Ameshaspands*,
ever-living® (and) ever-profitting”, who*! (i.e. the male Ameshaspands) as
well as® ’\(Female Ameshaspands) dwell® in the good mind*®.””

(4) **Yatha ti-i Ahura Mazda ménghacha, vaochascha, daoscha,
vareshcha, ya vohu Atha t0i dademahi, atha chishmahi, atha thwa 4aish
yazamaide; atha nemakhyamahi, atha ishiidyamaht thwa Mazda
Ahur§. (Recite twice).

(5) "’Vanghéush*®! khvaétéush®” khvaétata*, vanghéush* ashahya*®,
thwa® _ pairi-jasimaide*’", vanghuyao* _feseratvo*, vanghuyao”
Armatoish”'.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaetha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(4) Just as°° Thou. O Ahura Mazda’, hast thought®, spoken®', created
and worked® what™ (is) good®, in the same way® we regard® Thee®’, (so
do) we recognise Thy excellence”, (so’! do we) and worship” Thee”. O
Ahura Mazda®! thus’ we bow to Thee”, thus” we are indebted (to Thee)”.

(5) (O Ahura Mazda!) we may come near®’ Thee® through the
relationship® of good®' kinship”, Righteousness*, good*® Feseratu® (and)

ps For comparison see Ahunavad Gatha, Kardah II (Yasna Ha 29).
pt i.e. pass the lives for our nourishment.
pu For the explanation of this word, see note in my translation of Yasna Ha 39, para 2.

pv Only from the form of the words; Bahman; Ardibehesht and Sheherevar are male
Ameshaspands, and Aspandarmad, Khordad and Amaradad are female Ameshaspands.

pw i.e. in the hearts of men of good (pious) thoughts.
px Paras 4 and 5 are quoted in the yasna Ha 13, paras 5-6.

py In Dr. Geldner’s Edition this entire para 5 including Yenghe hatam is written with the note to
recite twice, although in none of our prayer books is mention made to recite it twice.


--- Page 143 ---

HAFTAN YASHT LARGE 127

Spandarmad”’.

(Kardah VI) (1) Ahu! at? paiti? adaha‘, Mazda Ahura’, mazdamcha°
biiricha’ kereshva®; rait? toi!’ khrapaiti'' ahmat hyat aibr?, hyat
mizdem!? mavaéthem"™ fradadatha'S daénabyo", Mazda Ahura!’. (2)
Ahya"® hvo” né” daid?!, ahmaicha” ahuye® manakhyaicha™ tat ahya*
ya tat®® upa-jamyama’’, tavacha® hakhema” ashakhyacha®” vispai
yave*!, (3) ’Daidr at* nerash** Mazda Ahura*, ashaund** asha-
chinangh6*’, aidyish** vastrayéng®  deregai* izai*! bézvaite”
hakhmaine*’, ahmaibyacha“ ahma* rafnangho”. (4) Atha*’ khvaétish®
atha® verezena”, atha*' hakhema™ khyat® yaish™ hishchamaide*® atha*®
ve*’ uta khyama®” Mazda Ahura ashavano"! ereshya®, ishtem® raiti™.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(1) O Ahura Mazda! do Thou create® great wisdom® and “abundance” in
these creatures*. O Lord of Wisdom"! (do Thou grant us) as much” reward"?
as Thou hast given’* to the religionists’®, like myself'* by means of Thy'®
Charity®, O Ahura Mazda!’! (2) Do thou Thyself” grant?! ®us”° (that gift) (O
Ahura Mazda!) for this” and for the spiritual world; thereby we may
attain?’ Thy friendship’? and Righteousness*’ for ever*’. (3) Do Thou grant?
us“ the bestowers of joy*', truthful** men*, desirous of righteousness*’,
dexterous® and “diligent®®, long enduring” prosperity*! (and) powerful”
friendship*. (4) (May it “‘be*’so*”) to (our) kinsmen*®, and® workers”, as
well as*!, to (our) friends. O Ahura Mazda®! (all) these™ we ask for*> from
*Thee*’. Moreover may we become” truthful®' and pure’ and through
charity“ (may we become) endeared® (to Thee).

(Kardah VID): (1) Stit6 gard vahméng! Ahurai Mazdai’?, Ashaicha
Vahishtai>, dademahicha‘, chishmahicha*®, acha dAvaédayamahi®. (2)
Vohi’ khshathrem® toi? Mazda Ahura’ apaéma" vispai yave';
hukhshathrasti® né* na va nairi'® va, khshaéta!’ ubdyo" anghvo”
hatam” hudastema”'.

(3) Humaim” thwa” izem™, yazatem* ashanghachim” dademaide”’.
Atha”® ti”? ne” gayascha*! astentaoscha* khyao*, ubdyo* anghvo**
hatam* hudastema*”.
pz Dr. Geldner takes para 3 in verse form of Five lines; each line ends at comma (,).
qa The original meaning of “buiri” (Sanskrit bhiri) is increase, abundance.
qb Probably, Prophet Zarathushtra speaks for Himself and for his helpers.
qe Harlez. “Brave workers”, (Darmesteter). “Warriors and agriculturists” (Spiegel).
qd i.e. they also may obtain the means of securing prosperity and welfare.

qe Some times, specially in the Gathas pronoun for Ahura Mazda stands in plural; see yasna Ha
28.2; Ha 32.9; Ha 34.14; Ha 46.18.


--- Page 144 ---

128 KHORDEH AVESTA

(1) We offer’, acknowledge’ and proclaim® “‘adorations together with
praises and reverence’ unto (the creator) Ahura Mazda? and unto Asha
Vahishta*. (2) O Ahura Mazda'®! may we attain Thy’? Good’ Kingdom®
forever and ever’. O Wisest”' Ruler'’, amongst the existing ones”, in both'®
the worlds’®! (Thou art) the Good Ruler’? for us'*, man'> or woman!®.% (3)
(Speaks to the Creator Ahura Mazda): “We dedicate’’ (an offering) to Thee®
the Lord“ of good wisdom”, worthy of adoration*, follower of
righteousness”®; so”® mayest Thou’ be*? to us* the limbs of life and body, O
Wisest One*’, amongst the existing ones**, in both the worlds*!”

(4) Hanaémacha* zaémacha®” Mazda Ahura”, thwahmi" rafnahi”
daregayi® aéshacha“ thwa* émavantascha” buyama”’; rapdishcha*® ti
né” daregemcha” ushtacha*', hatam” hudastema™.

(5) Thwoi* staotarascha*, manthranascha®, Ahura Mazda*’,
*aogemadaécha*, usmahicha®, visamadaecha”; hyat mizdem®”
mavaéthem® fradadatha™ daénabyo* Mazda “Ahura. (To recite twice).

(6) “Ahya” hvo® né daidi®, ahmaicha” ahuye” manakhyaicha”; tat
ahya” ya tat’ upa-jamyama” tavacha” sarem” ashakhyacha”™ vispai
yave”.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

Humatanim hikhtanam = hvarshtanam, yadacha  anyadacha,
verezyamnanamcha vaverezananamcha, mahi aibi-jaretard,
naénaéstar6, yathana vohunam mahi. (To recite twice). Yatha Ahi
Vairy04; Ashem Vohi 3. Yasnem sirem Haptanghaitim ashavanem
ashahe ratim yazamaide.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

qf For the explanation of “Stutd gard vahmeng” see my translation of Yasna Ha 41, note of the
first paragraph.

qg “Let each man of us and so each woman thus abide” Mills); “a good sovereign, man or wo-
man, may rule over us” (Darmesteter).

qh Aogemadaécha usmahicha visamadaécha - From these three verbs the treatise with Avesta
and Pahlavi versions called “Aogemaide” is originated, whose initial words are ““aogemadaécha
usmahicha visimadaecha”. The meaning of these three verbs is generally rendered as under:- “TI
come into the world (aogemadaécha). I accept (the calamity or evil of the world)
(visamadaécha). I resign myself to death” (Darmesteter).

qi Paras 5 and 6 occur in yasna Ha VII, paras 24-25.

qj i.e. we praise the holy (and) efficacious Yasna Haptanghaiti which is the Lord of Righteous -
ness.


--- Page 145 ---

HAFTAN YASHT LARGE 129

(4) O Ahura Mazda“! May we become worthy*® of long life* in gaining
joy” in Thy (remembrance)*', and may we succeed* (in this good wish)!
May we be” lovers“ of Thine* and, of Thou mighty**, Wisest One*’ amongst
the existing ones”, Thou shouldst rejoice** us” with prosperity*’ for a long
time*’. (5-6) O Ahura Mazda*’! We call ourselves (we cry aloud), we
accept® and agree® to be Thy praisers® and reciters of Holy Spells
(manthra)**.0 Ahura Mazda®! Do Thou Thyself® grant us® for this” and the
spiritual” world”! (as much) reward® as*' Thou has given to the religionist®
like myself whereby? we may reach” the chieftainship” and
Righteousness” of Thine” for eternity.

(Kardah VIII) (1) Yazamaide! vé? Amesha Spenta* yasnahe*
Haptanghatodish* handata®; apamcha® khao’ yazamaide®; apamcha?
peretiish’’ yazamaide"; pathamcha’ vicharanao’ yazamaide";
pathamcha'’ hanjamanao’ yazamaide”’. (2) Gairishcha' afshtachino”
yazamaide”; vairishcha?! avezdanadonghd” yazamaide*; aspenacha™
yevino*> yazamaide*; payucha”’ thworeshtara”* yazamaide”; Mazdam-
cha®® Zarathushtremcha*! yazamaide*. (3) Zamcha** asmanemcha*
yazamaide*; vatemcha*® dareshim®’’ Mazdadhatem*® yazamaide”;
taéremcha®” Haraithyao Berezo*' yazamaide’; bimimcha* vispacha“
vohu* yazamaide*.

(1) O Ameshaspands*! We worship! you’ through the Prayer* of Yasna
Haptanghaiti*. We praise® the springs’ of water®; the bridges’? over the
waters’; the forkings'® “of the highways"; the “meetings'® of the roads"*. (2)
We praise? the mountains'’ from which the waters flow’; the lakes”!
brimming with the waters”; “the heaps* of corns”; we praise’? both the
protectors’’ (guardians) and “the modellers”*; (the creators or the artisans)
we praise” (the Creator) Ahura Mazda* and (the Prophet) Zarathushtra*’. (3)
We praise* the earth’? and the sky*; the stormy*’ wind*® created by Ahura
Mazda*’; (the peak) Taera*’ of (the Mount) Albourz*’; and, all** good things”.

(4) Mano vohi* urunascha* ashaunam” yazamaide™; vasimcha*!
yam” panchasadvaram®™ yazamaide™; kharemcha yim ashavanem*
yazamaide*, yo’ hishtaite*’ maidim® zrayanghod® vouru-kashahe";
zrayo” vouru-kashem® yazamaide™. (5) Haomemcha®  zairim®
berezantem®” yazamaide*; Haomem® frashmim” fradat-gaéthem”!
yazamaide”; Haomem” diraoshem™ yazaimaide™. (6) Apamcha”
ferakhshaostrem” yazamaide”; vayamcha” ferafraothrem®
yazamaide*'; athaurunamcha® paiti-ajanthrem® yazamaide™, yoi*
yeya® dirat®’ ash6-isho® dakhyunam®. Vispanscha” Amesha Spenta”!
qk i.e. dividing into branches, the separating of the ways.
ql i.e. that place where three or more roads meet together.
qm Darmesteter: “growing corn” (Harlez); race-course of horses (Justi).

qn This seems to refer to Spenta Mainyu and Angra Mainyu.


--- Page 146 ---

130 KHORDEH AVESTA

yazamaide”.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(4) We worship the good mind*’ and the souls® of the righteous
(people). We praise™ (the place called) Vasi*! with fifty gates*. We
praise (that) righteous “khar’’** which*’ stands* in the midst® of the sea®,
Vouru-kasha‘', and the Sea® Vouru-kasha®. (5) We praise® the green® (and)
exalted®’ Haoma®; we praise” Haoma™, the increaser of the world” and the
promoter”; we praise” Haoma”, warding off sickness” (i.e. the withholder
of diseases). (6) We praise” the flowing” of the waters’; the flight®® of the
birds”; the advent® of the priests”, who* ”go* to distant places*’ desiring
(to promote) purity®* of the countries®. We worship” all the Ameshaspands”’.

(To recite in baz) Ahura Mazda Khodae, awaziini mardum, mardum
sardagan hama_ sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem _behedin
mazdayasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad; aediin bad. (To recite aloud).
Yatha Ahi VairyO 2. Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha
afrmami Ahurahe Mazdao raévato khvarenanguhatd. Ameshanaim
Spentanam, vanghave mananghe akhshtdish ham-vantyao, taradhato
anyaish daman, Asnahe khrathwd mazdadhatahe, gaoshd-sritahe
khrathw0 mazdadhatahe, ashahe vahishtahe sraeshtahe, Airyamanod
ishyehe sirahe mazdadhatahe, Saokayéo vanghuyao vouru-doithrayao
mazdadhatayao ashaonydo, khshathrahe vairyehe ayokhshustahe
marezdikai thrayddrigaove, Spentayao vanghuyao Armatoish, rataydo,
vanghuyao vouru-doithrayao mazdadhatayao ashaonyado, haurvatatd
rathwo yairyay4o hushitdish, saredhaéibyo ashahe ratubyo. Ameretatd
rathw0 fshaonibya vathwabya, aspinibya yaonibya, gaokerenahe sirahe
mazdadhatahe.

(During Havan Gah as well as Second Havan Gah, recite as under):

Mithrahe vouru gaoyadtoish. Ramanascha khvastrahe. Ashem Vohi

(If Gah be Rapithwan, recite as under):-
Ashahe Vahishtahe athrascha Ahurahe Mazdao Ashem Vohi 1.

(If Gah be Uzirin, recite as under):-

qo Vasimcha yam panchasadvaram - In the Pahlavi book Bundehesh this is regarded as a fish of
a huge size and is the protector of all fish. Harlez and Darmesteter have translated this name ac-
cording to Bundehesh; “the fish of fifty fins” (Mills); Spiegel takes it as “a dwelling-place hav-
ing fifty fountains”.

qp Its significance appears to be that those priests who go to other countries for the propagation
of the holy Zoroastrian Religion may return safe after being fully successful in their own good
mission.


--- Page 147 ---

HAFTAN YASHT LARGE 131

Berezatd ahurahe nafedrd apam apascha mazdadhatayao. Ashem
Vohi 1.

(If Gah be Aiwisruthrem, recite as under):-

Ashaunam fravashinam ghenanamcha vird-vathwanam yairyaoscha
hushitoish, amahecha hutashtahe huraodhahe, verethraghnahecha
ahuradhatahe vanaintyaoscha uperatato. Ashem Vohi 1.

(If Gah be Ushahen recite as under):-

Sraoshahe ashyehe _ ashivatd, verethrajand  fradat-gaethahe,
Rashnaosh__razishtahe, Arshtatascha fradat-gaethayao _-varedat-
gaethayao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha: Hazangrem: Jasa me avanghe Mazda: Kerfeh
Mozd.

I praise the worship, veneration, efficacy and power of Ahura Mazda,
keeper of treasures and glorious and of the Ameshaspands.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan). Mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan), namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidile angrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashOtemem. Staomi Ashem: Ashem Vohii 1.

Gorje koreh awazayad haft Amashaspand berasad amavand
pirozgar amavandi pirozgaril. Dad Din beh mazdayasnan, 4gahi ravai
goafarangani bad hafte keshvar zamin: aediin bad. Man 4no 4wayad
shudan. Man 4no awayad shudan, man 4no 4wayad shudan ashaone.
Ashem Vohi 1.

(Facing the South): Dadare gehan Dine Mazdayasni, Dade
Zarathushti: namase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sira Anahite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem urvaire vanguhi mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahurem Mazdam _ raévantem khvarenanguhantem yazamaide,
Amesha Spenta hukshathra hudhaongho yazamaide: Ashem Vohi 1.

Haft Amashaspand berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

ARDIBEHESHT YASHT
Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdin Ahura mazda Khodae Awazini, gorje khoreh
awazayad; Ardibehesht Amashaspand berasad."

qq For its entire translation see beginning of the same yasht.)

qr i.e. May Ardibehesht Ameshaspand come (to my help).


--- Page 148 ---

132 KHORDEH AVESTA

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum: az harvastin dushmata
duzhikhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni tani
ravani get] mmOani, okhe avakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazd4o, tardidite angrahe mainyéush:
haithyavarashtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem, staomi ashem. Ashem
Vohii 3.

Fravarané mazdayasn6o Zaruthushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaesh6 (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Ashahe vahishtahe
sraéshtahe, Airyamanad ishyehe siirahe mazdadhatahe, Saokayao
vanghuyao vouru-doithrayao mazdadhatayao ashaonyao,
*Khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha,
Yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota fra-me mrite, atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra
ashava vidhvao mraoti. Ashem Vahishtem sraéshtem ameshem spentem
yazamaide; Airyamanem ishim yazamaide, sirem Mazdadhatem
yazamaide: saokam vanguhim vouru-doithram Mazdadhatam ashaonim
yazamaide.

1. Mraot' Ahurd Mazdao’ Spitamai*> Zarathushtrai* dat yat’ Asha
Vahishta  fradaithisha’ Spitama*® Zarathushtra’, staotarecha’®,
zaotarecha! zbatarecha” mathranacha™, yashtarecha™, afritarecha",
aibyaretarecha”, vwanghan’” khshaéta'® raochao”, khvanvaitishcha”’
verezo”', ahmakem” yasnaicha* vahmaicha“ yat* ameshanam
spentanam”.

1. (The Creator) Ahura Mazda? spoke' unto Spitaman? Zarathushtra*: O
Spitaman® Zarathushtra’! for the worship” and for the invocation™ of us”,
the Ameshaspands*® mayest Thou appoint’ (or mayest Thou regard’)
Ardibehesht (Ameshaspand) as the praiser'® the invoker'! the extoller’’, the
glorifier'® of the good"’ shining lights’? and brilliant”® (or marvellous*°) works

the revealer'’, the worshipper" and the eulogiser!>.“
pp g

2. Aat?”? aokhta”* Zarathushtrd”? mriidhi ba?! vachd” arsh-vacho*
Ahura Mazda™, yatha* te*® anghen*’ Asha Vahishta* fradahisha®
staotarecha” zaotarecha*!, zbatarecha” manthranacha*, yashtarecha“,
afritarecha*  aibi-jaretarecha*, vanghan*’ khshaéta*® raochao”,
khvanvaitishcha” verez6*', yishmakem*” yasnaicha® vahmaicha™ yat*
Ameshanam Spentanam*™.

2. Then?’ Zarathushtra said: O Ahura Mazda! Speak Thou*’ (unto me)
verily*! (that) word’, (that) true word’, so that*> for the worship and for the

qs i.e. for the worship, etc., of the fairest Ardibehesht, of the yazata named Airyamana, the be-
loved, the brave, of Saoka, the good, of large eyes, righteous created by Ahura Mazda (of all
these virtues.) (See Khorshed Nydyesh). For the explanation of the word “Saoka” see glossary.

qt I myself do not think the translation of this and the second paragraph to be correct; a better
translation than this should be made.


--- Page 149 ---

ARDIBEHESHT YASHT 133

invocation™ of you”, the Ameshaspands*, Thou mayest desire to appoint*®

(or Thou mayest want to appoint) Ardibehesht (Ameshaspand)** as the
praiser®’, the invoker*', the extoller”, the revealer*’, the worshipper“, the
eulogizer* and the glorifier*® of the good*’ (and) shining** lights® (and)
brilliant®® (or marvellous)’ works”.

3. Adim' framraomi? Ashem Vahishtem’; yezi‘ framraomi’ Ashem
Vahishtem®, dat’ anyaésham® Ameshanim Spentanam’ hvayaonem";
yim" paiti’? Mazdao'’ humataish"*, yim'’ paiti'© Mazdao"” hikhtaish'",
yim”? paiti?? Mazdao”' hvarshtaish”. Gard-nmanem* Ahurahe™
hvayaonem”. Gard-nmanem” nereyo”’ asti?® ashavaoyo”. Naéchish*’
dravatam*! ayene’ paitish** gard-nmanem™, ravohu* ashayonem*
chithrem*’ Ahurem Mazdam*.

3. I like? him’ (i.e.) Ardibehesht*; when‘ I like* Ardibehesht*, then’ (he) of
(all) other’ AmeshAspands’ (becomes) a helper'®, whom! (the Creator) Ahura
Mazda" nourishes’ with good thoughts’, and good words'* and good
“actions. The Garothman (Paradise) is Ahura Mazda’s own abode.

4. The Garothman”® (Paradise) is*® for righteous”’ persons’’. None*? of the
wicked (person)*! or affluent going* towards* the abode of the righteous**
(which is) the Garothman*™ (and) towards (the Creator) Ahura Mazda*®.

Explanation: (Any wicked person cannot go to the Garothman, Paradise
or in the presence of Ahura Mazda. After passing away the soul of the
righteous man gets the place of paradise and the soul of the wicked goes to
hell. We find the statement concerning this in the Hadokht Nask fargard II
and III and in the Vendidad fargard XIX paras 27-32).

(5) Janaiti' vispaésham? angro-mainyaosh’, ahmai* yathwam’* pairi-
kanamcha‘®, Airyamanem’ manthranim*, mazishtem’? manthranam”,
vahishtem"™ manthranaim” vahishtdtemem™ manthranam", sraéshtem'®
manthranam’® sraéshtotemem'’” manthranam', ughrem’ manthra-
nam”, ughrodtemem”! manthranam”, derezrem” manthranam”, derez-
rétemem?> manthranam”, varethraghnim?’ manthranaim’’, vareth-
raghnydtemem” manthranam*”, baéshazem*! manthranam”, baéshaz-
yotemem*® manthranam*™.

(5) The prayer, “Airyamana’is the greatest? of the Holy Spells!°, best!
exceedingly best'’, fairest'®, most fair'’, powerful’? and most powerful?! of

qu Professor Darmesteter takes the words “humataish, hukhtaish, hvarshtaish” as an allusion to
the three grades of heaven, viz. star-paya,mah-paya and khorshed-paya, through which the
soulsof the righteous persons pass to Garothman: see Yasht XXII para 15.

qv This prayer, Airyamana should be understood as the fifty-fourth Ha of the Yasna called “A
Airyema Ishy6”. When it is recited as a benediction to the married couple, only half the portion
of the Ha is recited. Moreover, Airyamana is the name of the yazata too: and he is the angel
presiding over peace, happiness and comradeship, and is the yazata giving ease and comfort by
driving away the false notions from the mind regarding magic and witchcraft.


--- Page 150 ---

134 KHORDEH AVESTA

the Holy Spells”, firm”, firmest*’, victorious”’ and healing?! and the most
healing? of ‘the Holy Spells** (the prayer, Airyamana having all these
qualities) “smites' all’ the wizards’ and witches® of Angra Mainyu’ for him*
who worships Asha Vahishta and recites the Ha (or chapter) of A Airyema
Ishy6”)

6. Ashd-baéshazo**, datd-baeshazo*, karetd-baéshazo*’, urvaro-
baéshazo**, manthro-baéshazo”; baéshazanam” baéshazyodtemd*! yat”
manthrem-spentem-baéshazyo*; yo‘* narsh*® ashaond“  hacha”’
uruthwan*  baéshzyat”, aesho® zi!  asti? baéshazanam**
baéshazyotem6™.

6. One who heals by means of purificatory rites*> (or restores to health*>),
one who cures by law and justice*®, a surgeon*’ (or one who heals with the
knife*’) one who restores to health by means of vegetable drugs**, (herbal
medicines) (and) one who heals by means of reciting the manthra*® (thus
there are various doctors of five kinds). (But) he who heals by means of
reciting the manthra® (is) the best amongst (all) the healers*°, (because) from
the inner part of that** righteous*® man* he cures” (him). Amongst (all) the
physicians® he*’ indeed*' is the best healer™.

Explanation:- The meanings of the word baéshaza occurring in this
paragraph are “healer, curer, restorer to healthy condition by purifying the body
and mind”. Such five types of healers are mentioned. First - one who heals by
means of purificatory rites. He is to be regarded as the purifying priest, giving
ablution to polluted persons and the giver of Barashnum, whose function is to
give purification by driving away the pollution of the person. Second - one who
heals by law and justice should be regarded as the Judge, whose function is to
give justice as he deems fit, for both the plaintiff and the defendant, by giving
proper decision to the matters in dispute. Third - the surgeon is the doctor who
knows the work of surgery.

Fourth - one who restores to health by means of herbal medicines should
be regarded as a physician, who by means of herbs or by means of drugs
derived from various kinds of plants cures the ailing person. Fifth - one who
heals by recitation of manthra should be regarded as the physician giving
peace and ease to the mind by certain fixed sacred verses of the Holy Avesta
and giving comfort to the body. Moreover, of all the physicians, he who
gives relief and peace of mind to the ailing person by reciting the holy spells
is regarded as the greatest healer. The reason stated to be is that the person
who purifies the inner part of the righteous man, brings comfort to his body
and mind, and gives happiness by reciting near him, and explaining the

qw For the explanation of the word “manthra’, see glossary.

qx Here, the object of the verb “janaiti” is in the genitive plural. For destroying the malice of
Angra Mainyu the prayer named Airyaman is the most effective weapon; so also the yazata
called Airyaman. We find a reference about this in the Vendidad fargard XXII.


--- Page 151 ---

ARDIBEHESHT YASHT 135

efficacious and sacred verses of the Good Mazda Worshipping Religion.

7. Yaska' apa-dvarata’; mahrka’ apa-dvarata‘; daéva* apa-dvarata‘;
paityara’ apa-dvarata®; ashemaogho’ anashava”’ apa-dvarata"; mashyo-
sasta’” apa-dvarata’, (8) Azi-chithra’ apa-dvarata’, vehrké chithra’®
apa-dvarata”’; bizangré-chithra'’* apa-dvarata’”; tard-mata”” apa-
dvarata”'; pairimata” apa-dvarata™; tafnu’ apa-dvarata*; spazga”®
apa-dvarata”’; anakhshta** apa-dvarata”; duzdoithra®” apa-dvarata”’;
(9) Draoghé-vakhsh-draojishta” apa-dvarata*; jahi** yatumaiti* apa-
dvarata®*; jahi* kakhvaredhaine®* apa-dvarata®; vatd pourvo-
apakhtara“ apa-dvarata”; vato“ pourv6-apakhtara“ apa-nasyata*®.

7. (The reciter speaks):- O Sickness', do you “perish’; O (untimely)
death?! O demons*!; O opponents’! O Wicked" heretics®!; O oppressor of
men”! (8) O brood of the snake’! and the brood of the wolf'*! perish'’; O the
brood of (wicked man)'*! do you perish’; O ye refractory”’; O proud men™!;
O ye “hot-tempered™!; O ye slanderous (or calumnious!)” O ye inimical**!

O evil-eyed**! and (9) O ye liars”! you perish*; O wicked woman*
addicted to sorcery**! you perish*®; O wicked woman*’ of evil lustre*® and O
wind” blowing straight from the north! vanish*.

10. Yascha' me’ aétaésham:’ yat* azi-chithranam*, yo° janat’ aesham®
daevanam’, hazanghrai'’ hazanghro" pairi’, baévarai'’ baévano"™
paiti'®. Yaska'’® jainti'’; mahrka'® jainti’®; daeva” jainti?' paityara”
jainti?®, ashemaogh6™ anashava* jainti?®; mashy6-sasta”’ jainti?®. 11.
Azhi-chithra” jainti®®; vehrk6-chithra*' jainti*?; bizangrd-chithra®
jainti*; tard-mata® jainti**; pairi-mata” jainti*; tafnu® jainti”; spazga"!
jainti”; anakhsh ta® jainti“; dush-doithra® jainti*.

10. Who! (i.e. Asha Vahishta) smites’ for me’ a thousand" times! (and)
ten thousand’? times’> thousands"! and thousands" of those* broods of the
snakes (and) demons’. (That Asha Vahishta) smites!’ sickness'®, (untimely)
death'*; the daevas”’, and the opponents” smites”® the impious”* heretic”,
(and) the oppressors of men’. (11) Smites*’ the broods of snake”, and the
broods of wolf*', smites** (wicked men)**, the refractory men** (obstinate or
perverse men), proud and hot-tempered men”, smites®” the slanderous men*’,
inimical men* (and) the evil-eyed*.

12. Draogh6-vakhsh-draojishta' jainti’?; jahi> yatumaiti* jainti>; jahi®
kakhvaredhaine’ jainti®; vat? pourvd-apakhtara” jainti"'; vato”
pourvo-apakhtara® apa-nasyata™. (13) Yascha!’ me! aétaésham!” yat!®
bizangr6-chithranam” yo” janat?' aésham” daévanaim”™, hazanghrai™*

qy “Apa-dvarata” - imperative second person plural of the root dvar - Professor Spiegel, Justi,
Harlez and Darmesteter, taking this verb in imperfect tense consider the names preceding them
as subjects the sickness fled away, etc.

qz Ordinary meaning of “tafnu” is heat, fever.


--- Page 152 ---

136 KHORDEH AVESTA

hazanghro* pairi®® baévarai?’ baévano” paiti?’. Paurva-naémat” patat*!
dyaosh® daévanam® draojisht6* angro-mainyush® pouru-mahrko”.

12. (Asha Vahishta) smites? the liars'; smites> the wicked women?’
addicted to sorcery*; and of evil lustre’ (or cruel), smites” the wind blowing
straight from the north'® (and) vanishes"? the wind” blowing directly form
the north'’. (13) Who’ (i.e. Asha Vahishta) smites?! forme'® a thousand”
times®, thousand” (and) ten thousand’’ times”, ten thousand” of those’’
broods'® (wicked men)" (and) the demons”’.

The daeva*’ of deceit”, Angra Mainyu’, full of death** ran away*! from
the front (of Asha Vahishta).

14. Adavata' angrd mainyush? pouru-mahrko’, avoya* me* bagha‘®
Asha Vahishta’ yaskanam*® yasko-tema’ janat!, yaskanam"
yashkétema” tbaéshayat’*, Mahrkanam'™ mahrkdtema® janat'®
mahrkanam” mahrkétema® tbaéshayat”. Daévanam” daévodtema”!
janat”, daévanam™ daévotema™* tbaéshayat*®. Paityaranam”
paityardtema”’ janat®, paityaranam” paityardtema”’ tbaéshayat*!.
Ashemaoghd” anashava* janat** ashemaogho* anashava® tbaéshayat*’.
Mashy6o-sasta** sastdtema® janat**, mashyd-sasta’! sastdtema”?
tbaéshayat®.

14, Angra Mainyu,’ full of death,’ howled out!:- Woe*! the part® (or the
sacred verse) of (the prayer) “Asha Vahishta will smite'® and vanquish (or
will kill'®) the sickliest? of the sicknesses* of mine*, he will smite’® and
vanquish the deadliest'* of the deadly’*, he will smite” the foremost daevas”!
amongst the daevas”’, and will vanquish” them, he will smite?’ and vanquish
the most counter-working”’ of the counter-workers”, he will smite the
unholy** apostates” (and) will vanquish*’ them; he will smite“? and vanquish
the most oppressive*’ of the oppressors of men*’.

15. Azichithra'-Azichithrétema? janat’, azichithra‘*-azichithrdtema®
tbaéshayat®. Vehrk6-chithra’-vehrkochithrotema® janat®, vehrko-

ra The prayer called “Asha Vahishta” should be regarded as Ashem Vohu. Through the charm of
these prayers - Ashem Vohi, Yatha Ahi Vairyo and Yenghe hatam, i.e. by. the recitation of these
prayers with proper understanding sincere heart, the influence of Ahriman, daevas-demons, dru-
jas and wicked men will vanish from the presence of the reciter. We find the writing of similar
significance in yasna Ha 61 known as Ahunem Vairim. “Bagha Ashahe Vahishtahe” instead of
“pagha Asha Vahishta’” which is given by Prof. Westergaard in the footnote seems to be better.
The meaning of “bagha” equivalent to Sanskrit “bhaga” is “divine power”: e.g. staram baghd
datanam, i.e. of the stars created by the divine power (see Vendidad fargard XIX para 23). But
in this place I have thought it proper to take the word “bagha” equivalent to Sanskrit bhaga
meaning “portion” share, fortune. Similarly, for the piece of Ahunavar, the words “bagha
Ahunahe Vairyehe” occur (see Yasna Ha XIX para 23). Moreover, the meaning of the phrase
“Aavoya me bagha” (which Ahriman speaks) can also be this: Woe unto my luck! In conformity
with this the subject of the verbs “Janat” and “Tbaéshayat” can be “Asha Vahishta”. In lieu of
“Avoya me bagha” if we take “avoya me bavoya”, according to Dr. Geldner, its meaning than
can be Woe unto me! Asha Vahista will smite the bringers of illness. Bavoya, i.e. Woe!


--- Page 153 ---

ARDIBEHESHT YASHT 137

chithra’” vehrk6-chithrdtema" tbaéshayat’. Bizangrod-chithra’-
bizangro-chithrotema* janat’s, bizangr6-chithra’*-bizangr6-
chithrétema”’ tbaéshayat'*. Tard-mata” janat”, tard-mata”! tbaéshayat”.
Pairi-mata* janat*‘, pairi-mata* tbaéshayat®. Tafnu?’-tafndtema”
janat”, tafnu*’-tafnotema*! tbaéshayat*. Spazga*’-spazgotema * janat*,
spazga**-spazgotema*”’  tbaéshayat®*. §Anakhshta*-anakhshtdtema”
janat",  anakhshta*?-anakhshtdtema*®  tbaéshayat*. Duzdoithra*-
duzdoithrotema* janat*’, duzdoithra*-duzdoithrotema” tbaéshayat*.
(16) Draogh6é-vakhsh-draojishta™ janat’, draoghd-vakhsh-draojishta™
tbaéshayat™. Jahi*® yatumaiti® janat*’, jahi*® yatumaiti® tbaéshayat®.
Jahi* kakhvaredhaine® janat®, jahi“ kakvaredhaine® tbaéshayat®.
Vato  pourvod-apakhtara® janat®, vatd’  pourvod-apakhtara”!
tbaéshayat”.

(15) (The part of the prayer, Asha Vahishta) will smite? and vanquish the
snakiest? of the snake’s broods! (i.e. many such persons having the worst
traits of snakes) will smite? and vanquish the most wolfish® of the wolf’s
brood’, will simte'> and vanquish the worst’? of the (worst man’s) brood
(and) will smite” and vanquish refractory persons’ will smite** and vanquish
haughty persons”; will smite’? and vanquish the fieriest”® of the fiery?’ (and)
will smite** and vanquish the most slanderous persons** amongst the
slanderous®; will smite*’ the most inimical persons’ of the inimical*’ (and)
will vanquish“ them, will smite*’ and vanquish the most evil-eyed persons“.
(16) (The part of the prayer called Asha Vahishta) will smite* the liars*! and
will vanquish™ them will smite the bad woman*> addicted to sorcery** and
will vanquish® her will smite® and vanquish the wicked woman of evil
lustre® (cruel) will smite® the wind® blowing straight from the north®’ (and)
will vanquish it”.

(17) Apa-nasyat! drukhsh’, nasyat? drukhsh‘, dvarat® drukhsh‘®
vinasyat’; apakhedhre® apa-nasyehe’, ma!’ merenchainish" gaéthao”
astvaitish’? ashahe"*. (18) Ahe!® raya'® khvarenanghacha”, tem™ yazai’®
surunvata”” yasna*! Ashem Vahishtem” sraéshtem?> Ameshem
Spentem™; zaothrabyo’** Ashem Vahishtem” sraéshtem?” Ameshem
Spentem”’ yazamaide”.

(17) (The reciter wishes): May the druj? perish'! may he disappear*! may
the druj® run away’ (and) perish’! (O druj!) do thou vanish’ to the North (so
that) the corporeal’? worlds” of righteousness'* (may) not'® (be) destroyed".
(18) On account of his’* lustre!® and glory’ I worship” that'* Asha Vahishta”
(who is) the fairest” Ameshaspand™ with the audible”’ (or famous)? yasna”’;
we worship” Asha Vahishta®® (who is) the fairest?’ Ameshaspand* with
libations”>.

Haomayd' gava_ baresmana,_ hizvod-danghangha, manthracha,
vachacha = shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha, arshukhdhaéibyascha


--- Page 154 ---

138 KHORDEH AVESTA
vaghzibyo.
Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awaziinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud): Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha afrinami, Ashahe
Vahishtahe Sraéshtahe, Airyamand Ishyehe siirahe Mazdadhatahe,
Saokayao vanghuyao vouru-doithrayao Mazdadhatayao ashaonyao.
Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmii raescha; Hazangrem; Jasame avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan), mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan), namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyeush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi Ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje khoreh avazayad Ardibehesht Ameshaspand _berasad
amavand pirozgar amavandih pirozgaril. Dad Din beh Mazdayasnan,
agahi ravai goafranganl bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man 4no
avayad shudan, man 4no Avayad shudan, man 4no Avayad shudan.
Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite while facing the South): Dadare gehan dine Mazdayani dade
Zarathushti. Nemase-te ashaum sevishte Aredvi Sira Andhite ashaone.
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ashem Vahishtem sraéshtem Ameshem Spentem yazamaide. Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ardibehesht Ameshaspand berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

NIRANG OF ARDIBEHESHT YASHT

(Note: This nirang should be recited three times after the recitation of
Ardibehesht yasht).

Dadare' jehadar’ tavana* O dana‘, O parvartar® O afaridegar’, O
kerfehgar’, O avakhshidar®. Ahereman’? hich’, nadan'', O natavanad””
ba hich chiz’ nashahed’. Ahura Mazda’ dadari'®, ahereman’’
marochinidari'’®. Dadar’? pak”, ahereman’' napak”; ahereman® khak
shavad™, ahereman”® dir shavad”, ahereman’’ dafe shavad”,
ahereman”’ shekasteh shavad*’, ahereman*' halak shavad*. Avval® din*™


--- Page 155 ---

NIRANG OF ARDIBEHESHT YASHT 139

Zarathushti® pak**; Ahura Mazda*’ buland® kavi’’, beh*, awazint"’.
Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1. (To recite three times).

The Creator', the keeper of the world’, (is) omnipotent? and omniscient‘,
and the Nourisher of all, and the producer®, and the Doer of meritorious
deeds and overseer’. Ahriman? is nothing whatsoever’ (and is) ignorant"’,
and cannot do'?"* anything'’. Hormazd" (is) the Creator'® (and) *Ahriman'”
the destroyer'’. The Creator!’ (is) Holy” and Ahriman’! (is) wicked’. May
Ahriman” be perished**, may Ahriman”> be far away*®, may Ahriman”’ be
vanished”*, may Ahriman” be defeated*°, may Ahriman*! be overcome*. The
foremost® Religion™ (is the) pure*® Zoroastrian** (Religion); Hormazd*” (is)
Exalted**, Powerful*®, Good” (and) the Increaser*!.

KHORDAD YASHT
"Kk hshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdin Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh
awazayad. Khordad Ameshaspand berasad."

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarsta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested, az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani get mmOani, okhe avakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom.

Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi
3. Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévod Ahura-tkaésho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Haurvatato’ rathvo®
yairyayao’ hushitodish", saredhaéiby6" ashahe” ratubyd6'’, khshnaothra™
yasnaicha’’ vahmaicha’® khshnaothraicha” frasastayaécha", Yatha Ahu
Vairyo” zaota” fra me”! mrite”. Atha ratush ashatchit hacha*® fra
ashava™“ vidhvao* mraoti”’. Haurvatatem?”? Ameshem Spentem”®
yazamaide”; yairyam*” hushitim*! yazamaide,” saredha* ashavana™
ashahe*® ratavo* yazamaide*’.

For the propitiation'* (of the Creator Ahura Mazda) (during Gah so and
so), for the worship!’ of Khordad’ the Lord® of the coming of the season? at
its proper time'® from the Saredha"! (i.e. years), the periods’ of holiness’,

rb For the explanation of Hormazd and Ahriman, see note to Jasa me avanghe Mazda.

rc Dr. Geldner has given the name of this yasht as “Avardad Yasht”, and in the introductory
Pazend portion has taken “Avardad Ameshaspand berasad”, although in the passages of
“fravarane” and “yasnemcha” he taking thus “Haurvatato rathv6 yairyayao hushitdish

saredhaeibyo ashahe ratuby6” has accepted the “khshnuman” of Khordad Ameshaspand. Avesta
text of this yasht is in an ambiguous state.

rd i.e. may Khordad Ameshaspand come (unto my help)!


--- Page 156 ---

140 KHORDEH AVESTA

for (his) invocation'®, pleasure'” (and) glorification’*, the Zaotar”® (i.e. the
Officiating priest)? may proclaim” before me*' (the excellences of the
sacred verses of) Yatha Ahi Vairyo,’’ and (the Raspi (i.e. tthe assistant priest)
(who is) pious™ (and) learned”* may proclaim” (the excellences of these
verses) atha ratush ashat-chit hacha®. We praise? Khordad?’ Ameshaspand;”*
we praise* the coming of the season*® at its proper time;*' we praise the

holy** Saredha*? (the years) which are the periods** of holiness*.

(1) Mraot! Ahuré Mazdao? Spitamai’? Zarathushtrai* azem* dadham*
Haurvatato’ naram® ashaonam’® avaoscha”, rafndoscha"
baoshanaoscha”, khvitaoscha’; avoi'! fracha’s yaokhmaide’’, yo!” te'®
jasaiti? ameshanim spentanim”, yatha”! jasaiti?? ameshanam
spentanam” vohii mand”, ashem vahishtem*, khshathrem vairim”,
spentaém armaitim”’, haurvataoscha” ameretataoscha”.

(2) YO** aésham*! daévanam® hazanghrai* hazanghro™ paitish*,
baévarai* baévano*’; ahankhshtai* ahankhshtayo” paitish”, nameni*!
ameshanam spentanam® Haurvatatd zbaydit“, nastim* janat*, hashi“”’
janat®, ghashi® janat*, saéne*! janat” bizi® janat™.

(1) (The Creator) Ahura Mazda? spoke! unto Spitaman? Zarathushtra*: I°
created® (the Holy-Immortal) Khordad’ for’? happiness’? and pleasure’? to
help righteous men*. Just as”! (any one through the yasna) would come up”
(for help) to Bahman*, Ardibehesht”, Sheherevar®, Spandarmad”’,
Khordad** and Amardad from amongst the Amesha Spentas”’, (in the same
way) we are “pleased'*!° upon” a person'’? who may come up” to thee’®.

(2) He who* would invoke“ the name“! of Khordad*’ from amongst the
Ameshaspands® (in order to withstand the attacks) of (the)*’ demons”,
thousand’, ten thousand** or innumerable*®® times*®, would smite*® the
(daeva) nasush hashi*’ ghasi “saeni and buzi*?.

(3) Aat® paoirim® framraomi®’ narem® ashavanem™; yezi™ paoirim®!
framraomi® narem® ashavanem®™ imat® Rashnavo” razishta’; imat®*
ameshaéibyO spentaebyo®, yo” asti7' mainyavanam” yazatanam”,
nairyO-namanio”™ tao” bujat”® narem” ashavanem”™. Hacha” nasum’*,
hacha*! hashi®, hacha®* ghashi*, hacha® saéne*, hacha®’ bizi®*, hacha®
haénayao _—perethu-ainikayao”', hacha” drafshayao”’ perethu-
uzgerptayao™, hacha® mashyai™, dravaityai” sastayai**, hacha” starai'™
vairyai', hacha’? nar6? sastayai*, hacha® yatai’, hacha’ pairikai®’, hacha?’
urvista!.

(3) First of all°® I choose*’ the righteous® man**; (because) for this

re Or we keep friendship with him. Original meaning “we unite”. Sanskrit root pra-yuj = to
unite; to keep friendship.

rf Satisfactory explanation of this word is not known; these must be the names of certain types
of demons producing evil.


--- Page 157 ---

KHORDAD YASHT 141

reason that® the (most) just®’ Rashna yazata® and (those)’* Ameshaspands”
who” are” amongst the heavenly” yazatas” of the male species”, “protect’®
that righteous® man’’. (Explanation: The matter as to how they protect that

righteous man is stated below):

From” nasush (daeva)**, hashi®” ghashi*, saeni buzi (and) from the
army*”” with the wide battle array®', the banner® (or “spear)” broad™ and
uplifted™, the wicked” (and) tyrannical person’, the “dagger'® made of
metal', oppressive* men’, the wizard°, the witch’ (and) from’ the ‘straying
way”.

(3) Kutha" para? ashaonam® patha’ urvaésaiti's, kutha’®
dravatam’’. Aat'® mraot!? Ahurd Mazdao”, yezi?! me? manthrem”
framrava™, marao * va”, drepjayao”’ va”*, fra va” mrava* karshaim*!
karayeiti, haom* tanim*™ gaozaiti*®.

(4) Kamchit** thwamcha*”’ drujemcha* haithyd-ayanam” hentim”
"*kamchit"! va? aipyaénam® hentim“, kamchit va‘* raéthwanam‘’.
Kamchit* thwamcha®” drujemcha” airyabyo*' padhaéibyo” janani*,
thwamcha™ drujemcha® bandami*®, thwamcha*’ drujemcha® nighne’,
thwamcha® drujemcha® nizbarem® drujemcha®,

(1) In what way"! do the paths'* of the righteous and wicked (people)'”
part as under’*'*(differ) (from each other)?

Explanation:- (Its significance is, what is the difference between the paths
of the virtuous, religious people and the sinful people?)

Then!* (the Creator) Ahura Mazda?’ spoke’: If?! (any person) recites
aloud™* My” holy spell?? (and becomes) the memorizer” or’ the reciter?’ (of
that Holy Spell), or® whilst reciting*® draws® “Kash”?! (or furrows)*’, (that
person) protects* his own*? body* (from the attacks of the demons and
drujas and from the path of wickedness).

(5) (For inducing men to deceit) I will smite* (thee)*’ away from the
locations” of the Aryan (people)*! any druj** whatsoever*® or (the drujas)

rg As some words cannot be translated grammatically, the translation of this paragraph word by
word could not be done. Better translation than this should be done.

th For the meaning of the word perethu-drafshayao,see Hormazd Yasht, para 10.

ri Professor Justi; from the sword (Prof. Harlez); from the naked dagger (Dr. Spiegel); from the
wilful sinner (Professor Darmesteter).

rj Darmesteter’s English translation; distress, calamity (Darmesteter’s French translation); from
the demon called urvista (Justi); from every attack (Harlez).

=99

rk Instead of the words from “Kamchit” up to “airyabyo padhaéiby6” in some former prayer
books the text runs as under:- “hatarem haenem kamchit thwamcha drujemcha ndit vainane
humatem kamchit thwamcha drujemcha arethaéiby6 perethaéibyo”. This text Professor Wester-
gaard and Dr. Geldner have given in the footnotes. The text which I have given above comes out

quite similar in the modern prayer books.


--- Page 158 ---

142 KHORDEH AVESTA

coming openly’, secretly’, and causing pollution*’; I will bind** thee*’, (the
druj**) with fetters®, I will smite® thee®, and (I) “will drive® (thee) out.

(6) Thri-karshem® frakarayeiti® fra-mraomi® narem” ashavanem®;
khshvash®-karshem” frakarayeiti” khshvash” framraomi’ narem”™
ashavanem”; nava-karshem” frakarayeiti”, nava”® framraomi” narem*
ashavanem*',

(6) (The Creator Ahura Mazda speaks): I accept® (the man who) draws®
three “Kash” (or furrows)™ as the righteous® man‘; I accept’? (the man who)
draws”! six® furrows” as the righteous” man”; I accept” (the man who)
draws” nine furrows” as ™the perfectly” righteous*! man*®,

Explanation:- In this paragraph there occurs a subject regarding the
drawing of “Kash” (the furrows). One should understand that he should not
remain at ease after drawing the furrows only, but after this, certain
ceremonies are enjoined to be performed, the details of which are not given
here i.e. the act of operating the ceremony by drawing these furrows. Prior to
performing the “Pav Mehel” ceremonies of the Zoroastrian Religion, a
“Kash” or a circle is drawn round the place where that ceremony is
performed; its significance is that during the performance of the ceremony
no pollution, impurity or filth can exercise its evil influence over the place.

(7) Nameni® aésham® drujinam™ nasim*® kereta® paiti®’ janaiti®
jata® karapano” chithrim’!, jamacha” meretd*> saocha™; yé* zaota”
Zarathushtro”’, ereghatat’® hacha daozavat” havam'” anu _ ushtim!
zaoshemcha’, yatha? kathacha‘ he® zaosho°. (8) Pascha’ hu-frashm6-
daitim®, apakhedhra-naémem’ janaiti!® pascha" hvo”  nodit’
uzukhshyamn6" nasiim!® sterethwata!® snaithisha’” vikhrimantem"™
marem nashaiti’’, mainyavanam” yazatanam?! khshnaothraicha”
frasastayaécha”™.

(7) Whilst uttering the names® of the*’ drujas®* the (righteous) smite*”**

the nasush® with the sword;** the "karapans”™ are (rooted out) and, their
origin” is destroyed.” That Zaotar”® (i.e. the officiating priest) who is (the
representative) of Zarathushtra,”” acting according to’ his own will’ and
wish’ becomes pure” from every evil and from every type of °misdoing”.

(8) For the propitiation” of the Spiritual”? yazatas?! and for (their)
glorification™ from’ the (time of the shining) dawn’ (i.e. before the sun) has

arisen", (that righteous man) drives the nasu'* away by means of the broad'®

rl For escaping from the attacks of the druj, the Holy Spell which is enjoined to be recited in the
preceding paragraph should be understood as the Avesta of this paragraph.

rm The original meaning of nava (= Sanskrit nava) is “fresh, new”.
™m i.e. those who do not accept the commandments of the Zoroastrian Religion.

ro Professor Harlez.


--- Page 159 ---

KHORDAD YASHT 143

weapon!” towards’ the avakhtar (i.e. north)’ (and) "destroys the plague
strongly'®.

(9) Zarathushtra™ aétem’* manthrem”® ma?’ fradakhshay6’*, anyat”
pithre® va*' puthrai?, brathre*’ va“ hadho-zatai*, athravanai® va*’
thrayaone® haosr6-gaond”, hudaénd”; yo"! hudaénd”, ashava** aurvo“
visp6*-drujem* ramayehe*’.4

(9) (The Creator Ahura Mazda says):- O Zarathushtra*! Thou shouldst
not?’ teach*® Holy Spell’® other than’? the father'® having sons*, or*! a
brother’? born from the same womb*," or’ the athravan*® of three religious

orders*® possessing qualities adopted for gaining renown*?.*

Explanation:- (The other characteristics of what an Athravan should be
are stated below).

The athravan who is of good religion”, (being) of good religion”,
righteous* (and) renowned“ (becomes) the “vanquisher*’ of all*> drujas**;
(i.e. destroys every kind of falsehood).

Ahe*® raya® khvarenanghacha™, tem‘! yazai surunvata® yasna™
Haurvatatem™® Ameshem Spentem®; zaothrabyo*’ Haurvatatem**®
Ameshem Spentem® yazamaide.

On account of his** splendour® and glory® I worship® that?! Khordad*
Ameshaspand* with (or famous) yasna™, and worship® him with libations*’.

Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha vacha-
cha shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaetha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Ahura Mazda Khodae, awaziinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazdayas-
nan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud) Yatha Ahi
Vairy6 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami, haurvatatd

rp Instead of “Maremnashaiti” I have kept the reading “marem nashaiti” taking two words sep-
arately like Professor Justi. Mara + Sanskrit maraka - plague; Sanskrit nash = to perish.

rq For further explanation see Beheram yasht, para 46 and its footnote. The sentence from
“Zarathushtra” up to “thrayaona” also occurs in Beheram Yasht, Kardah XVI.

tr i.e. a boy having a brother or sister.

rs Perhaps “haosra” may be an abbreviation of “haosravangha” (= good renown). Possessing
suitable qualities” (Professor Harlez); Professor Justi has not translated the word haosrd-gaono”.

rt Persian word similar to “ramaya” is “ram kardan” (i.e. to subdue). Taking “vispa karesho
radhayeiti” according to Dr. Geldner’s text, Professor Darmesteter translates “they spread peace
and happiness in all the councils or assemblies”.


--- Page 160 ---

144 KHORDEH AVESTA

rathwo yairyayao hushitdish saredhaéibyo ashahe ratubyd. Ashem Vohi
1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me Avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak, (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan), namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyeush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashOtemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1. Gorje khoreh awazayad
Khordad Ameshaspand, berasad amavand pirozgar amavandih
pirozgari. Dad din beh mazdayasnan, agahi ravai goafarangani bad
hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man 4no Avayad shudan, man 4no
avayad shudan, man 4no Avayad shudan, ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

(Facing the South recite): Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarathushti. Nemasete ashaum sevishte Aredvi Stra Anahite ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1. Nemd urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone, Ashem
Vohi 1. Haurvatatem Ameshem Spentem yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 1.
Khordad Amashaspand berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

KHORSHED YASHT

Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1. Pa name yazdan
Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh awazayad. Khorshed
amarg rayOmand aurvad-asp "“berasad. Az hama gunah patet
pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa
geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem jast, oem bin biid ested. Az an
gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tanI ravani get! mmodani, okhe
avakhsh pasheman, pa sé gavashni pa patet hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush; haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashOtemem. Staomi Ashem. Ashem Vohii 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Hvare-khshaétahe”
ameshahe raévahe aurvat-aspahe, khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi Vairy6 zaota fra-me mrite,
atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti.

(1) Hvare-khshaétem ameshem raém aurvat-aspem yazamaide. Aat
yat hvare-raokhshni tapayeiti, dat yathvare-raochd tapayeiti, hishtenti
mainyavaonghd yazataonghd satemcha hazanghremcha; tat khvarend
ham-barayeinti, tat khvarend niparayeinti, tat khvarend bakhshenti

tu i.e. May Khorshed (yazata) the immortal, radiant (and) swift footed horse come (unto my
help)!

rv For the translation, notes and explanation of the Avesta and Pazend from here up to the end of
this yasht, see Khorshed Nyayesh.


--- Page 161 ---

KHORSHED YASHT 145

zam paiti Ahuradhatam, fradhaticha ashahe gaéthao, fradhaticha
ashahe tanuye, fradhaticha hvare yat ameshem raém aurvat-aspem.

(2) Aat yat hvare uzukhshyeiti, bvat zim Ahuradhatam yaoz-
dathrem, 4pem tachintam yaozdathrem, 4pem khanyam yaozdathrem,
apem zrayanam yaozdathrem, 4pem armaeshtaéam yaozdathrem, bvat
dama ashava yaozdathrem, yao henti spentahe mainyéush. (3) Yedhi zi
hvare nodit uzukhshyeiti, adha daéva vispao merenchinti, yao henti
hapto-karshvohva nava chish mainyava yazata, anghava astvaiti paiti-
dram, noit paitishtam vidhenti.

(4) YO yazaite hvare yat ameshem raém aurvat-aspem, paitishtatée
temangham, paitishtatée temaschitthranadm daévanim, paitishtatée
tayunamcha hazajnamcha, paitishtatée yatunamcha pairikanamcha,
paitishtatée ithyejanghO marshaonahe, yazaite Ahurem Mazdam,
yazaite Ameshe Spente, yazaite haom urvanem, khshnavayeiti vispe
mainyavacha yazata gaéthyacha, yO yazaite hvare yat ameshem raém
aurvat-aspem.

Yazai Mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitim hazanghra-gaoshem, baévare-
chashmanem; yazai vazrem hunivikhtem kameredhe paiti daévanam
Mithrahe vouru-gaoyaoit0ish, yazai hakhedhremcha  yat asti
hakhedhranam vahishtem antare maonghemcha hvarecha. (6) Ahe raya
khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna_hvare-khshaétem
ameshem raém aurvat-aspem zaothrabyd hvare-khshaétem ameshem
raém aurvat-aspem yazamaide.

Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvo-danghangha,
Manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha,
Zaothrabyascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vanghd
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awaziinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud) Yatha
Ahi VairyO 2. Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha afrinami,
hvare-khshaetahe ameshahe raevahe aurvat-aspahe. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéscha; Hazanghrem; Jasa me Avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.


--- Page 162 ---

146 KHORDEH AVESTA

Gorje khoreh awazayad Khorshed amarg rayOmand aurvat-asp,
berasad amavand pirozgar amavandith pirozgari. Dad din_ beh
Mazdayasnan, a4gahi ravai goafarangant bad hafte keshvar zamin;
aediin bad. Man 4no Avayad shudan, man 4no Avayad shudan, man 4no
avayad shudan. Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite facing the South) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarathushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sura Anahite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nemo urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate. Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

Hvare-khshaétem ameshem raém aurvat-aspem yazamaide. Ashem
Vohi 1.

Khorshed amarg rayOmand aurvat-asp berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

MAH YASHT
Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdin Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh
awazayad. Mah Bokhtar Mah yazad berasad.™ Az hama gunah patet
pashemaénum, az harvastin dushmata duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa
geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem jast, oem bin bid ested, az Aan
gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tanI ravani geti mmodani, okhe
avakhsh pashem§an pa sé gavashni pa patet hom, Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush; Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohii 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévd Ahura-tkaésh6 (the
Gah according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Maonghahe
“gaochithrahe géushcha aévd-datayao, géushcha pouru-saredhayao,
khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha,
yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota fra-me mrite, atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra
ashava vidhvao mraotu.

(1) Nemo Ahurai Mazdai, nemd Ameshaéibyd Spentaéibyo, nemo
maonghai gaochithrai, nem0O paiti-ditai, nemO paiti-dite. (2) Kat mao
ukhshyeiti, kat mao nerefsaiti. Pancha-dasa mao ukhshyeiti, pancha-
dasa mao nerefsaiti, yao he ukhshyastato, tao nerefsastatd; tao
nerefsastatd, yao he ukhshyastataschit. Ke ya mao ukhshyeiti nerefsaiti
thwat.

(3) Maonghem gaochithrem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide.
tw i.e. May Mah yazata, the bestower of purity (or salvation), come (unto my help)! “The be-
stower - distributor Mah yazata” (Darmesteter).

rx For the translation, its notes and explanation of the Avesta and Pazend from here up to the
end of the yasht, see Mah Bokhtar Nyayesh, above.


--- Page 163 ---

MAH YASHT 147

Tat maonghem paiti-vaénem, tat maonghem paiti-visem, raokhshnem
maonghem aivi-vaénem, raokhshnem maonghem aivi-visem, hishtenti
Ameshao Spenta khvarend darayeinti, hishtenti Ameshao Spenta
khvarend bakhshenti, zim paiti Ahuradhatam. (4) Aat yat maonghahe
raokhshni tapayeiti, mishti urvaranam zairi-gaonanaim zaramaém paiti
zemadha uzukhshyeiti. Antare-maonghaoscha, perend-maonghaoscha
vishaptathaoscha. Antare-maonghem ashavanem ashahe_ ratim
yazamaide; perend-maonghem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide;
vishaptathem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide.

(5) Yazai maonghem, gaochithrem, baghem, raévantem, khvare-
nanguhantem, afnanguhantem, tafnanguhantem, varechanguhantem,
khstavantem, ishtivantem, yaokhshtivantem, saokavantem, zairimya-
vantem, vohvavantem, baghem baéshazem.

(6) Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna maong-
hem gaochithrem; zaothrabyO maonghem gaochithrem ashavanem
ashahe ratim yazamaide.

Haomay6 gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha, vacha-
cha shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha, arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyd.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awaziinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud) Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 2.

(7) Yasnemcha vahememcha aojascha zavarecha  4frinami,
maonghahe gaochithrahe géushcha a€évddatayao, géushcha pouru-
saredhayao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me Avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan), mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan), namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, nemo Ahurai Mazdai, nemo Ameshaéibyd SpentaéibyO, nemd
maonghai gao-chithrai, nem6 paitiditai, nemd paitidite; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje khoreh awazayad Mah bokhtar Mah yazad berasad amavand
pirozgar amavandih pirozgari. Dad din ben Mazdayasnan Agahi ravai
goafarangani bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man Ano Avayad
shudan, man 4no Avayad shudan, man 4no Avayad shudan. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

(Facing the South, recite) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade


--- Page 164 ---

148 KHORDEH AVESTA

Zarathushti. Nemase-te ashaum sevishte Aredvi Sira Andhite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohii 1.

Nemo urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate. Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

Maonghem gaochithrem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide.
Ashem Vohi 1.

Mah bokhtar Mah yazad berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

TIR YASHT
Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdan Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini gorje khoreh
awazayad; Teshtar Tir rayOmand khorehmand” berasad.

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata duzh-
ukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa getI manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem jast,
oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani geti mindani, okhe awakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashdtemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem
Vohii 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaéshcha. Tishtryehe staro
raévatd khvarenanguhatd, satavaésahe frapahe sirahe ‘Mazda-
dhatahe, khshnaothra  yasnaicha vahmiaicha  khshnaothraicha
frasastayaécha, Yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota fra-me mrite, atha ratush
ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraotu.

(Kardah 1) (1) Mraot! Ahurd Mazdao* Spitamai? Zarathushtrai‘,
paonghe® anghuthwemcha® ratuthwemcha’, maonghemcha® maétha-
nemcha’?, myazdemcha”  fra-yazamaide". Yat’ me  staro™
khvarenanguhat6o hachaonte’, paracha!’ mao'* nerebyo’? khvaren6”’
bakhshenti?'. Yazai” shdithrahe® bakhtarem™ Tishtrim’* starem”
zaothrabyod”’.

(2) “Tishtrim’ starem” raévantem*, khvarenangu-hantem*!
yazamaide” rama-shayanem® hushayanem™ aurushem* raokhshnem*
fraderesrem?’, vyavantem*® baéshazim”, ravo-fraothmanem“*!
berezantem”, darat*® vyavantem“ banubyo*, raokhshnibyo” anahita-

ry i.e. May the radian t and glorious Teshtar Tir yazata come (unto my help)!

rz i.e. For the worship and for the praise of the radiant and glorious Star Teshtar (and) of
Satavaésa, the distributor of (rain-) water (to different places), powerful and created by Ahura
Mazda, etc., (see Khorshed Nyayesh, above).

sa Dr. Geldner takes this second paragraph in verse form of 14 lines. Every line stops at comma
(,) and full point (.).


--- Page 165 ---

TIR YASHT 149

éibyo””. Apemcha* perethu-zrayanghem”, vanguhimcha® durat*
frasritam™, géushcha® nam“ mazdadhatem*, ughremcha®™% kavaém*’
khvaren6*, fravashimcha® Spitamahe”, ashaon6! Zarathushtrahe™.

(1) (The Creator) Ahura Mazda’ spoke’ unto Spitaman? Zarathushtra*: “I
‘>will protect® the mastery® and the chieftainship’ of (Teshtar), the Moon® and
(Her) abode’, the votive offering’, so that'* My (other) glorious’> Stars'* may
move properly'® (and) the Moon'* may bestow”' glory”’ upon men’’.” (The
reciter says):- I worship” with libations’ the star”® Tishtrya”, the “bestower™*
(of rains) in the “‘field”>.

(2) “We worship” the radiant*®, glorious*', of a happy and good™
dwelling®, red*° (or crimson), shining*’, beautiful*’, helpful**, health-
giving’, “wide*’-stepping*', exalted”, star? Tishtrya*® from afar* helpful“
(unto men) with (his) shining*® and pure*’ rays. We worship” the “water*®
of the wide sea”, the famed™ *(Ardvi Sura), spread over distant (lands),
and beneficial®’, the name of Gavyodad*™, created by Ahura Mazda*, the
powerful® Kayanian’’ Glory® (and) the Fravashi® of the Holy®' Spitaman™
Zarathushtra™.

(3) Ahe® raya“ khvarenanghacha®, tem® yazai*’ surunvata® yasna®,
Tishtrim” starem”™ zaothraby6”; Tishtrim” starem™ raévantem”,
khvarenanguhantem” yazamaide”.

Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha vacha-
cha shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(3) I worship®’ the splendour™ and glory® of (Tishtrya), with the audible®
(or famous)® yasna® with libations”. We worship” the Star” Tishtrya”, the
sb “paonghe” - future tense, first person singular atmanepada; original form pa + h + e; root pa
= Sanskrit pa = to protect. Future termination h is added.

sc i.e. Producer of fertility by means of timely rains. Know that the yazata Tishtraya is presiding
over rains. His opponent is the demon Apaosha (the demon of drought); see paras 20-21 of this
yasht. Moreover, as a star he is compared with the Dog Star or Sirius. This entire paragraph is
rather complicated.

sd Shoithra = Skt. khshetra; any place. Its meaning is country also.

se This word “aurusha” means also “white” and it comes as an epithet of the horse of Sraosha
yazata; vide Srosh yasht (large) Karda 11.

sf Or loud-snorting (like the horse); “bestowing joy or spreading joy” (Spiegel and Harlez).
Tishtrya comes in the shape of a horse; We find a reference right this in the Sixth Karda of the
same yasht.

sg The reference may be about the sea called Vouru-kasha.

sh The same words “durat frasrutam” also occur in the Ardvi Sura Nyayesh, and from this some
support is sent to take as Aredvi Sura.


--- Page 166 ---

150 KHORDEH AVESTA

t?>

radiant” (and) glorious”.

(Kardah 2) (4) “Tishtrim! starem? raévantem? khvarenanguhantem‘
yazamaide®; afsh-chithrem®’, sirem’, berezantem amavantem’, diiraé-
sikem”, berezantem", upardé-kairim”’; yahmat’ hacha™ berezat'
haosravanghem”, apam nafedhrat"” hacha" chithrem”.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem, zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide.

Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha vacha-
cha shyaothnacha zaothrabyascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(4) We worship® the Star’ Tishtrya' (with such epithets as) the radiant’,
glorious’, having the seed of the waters®, efficacious’ the ‘exalted’,
powerful’, whose light goes afar'®, lofty'!, working surpassingly’*. Whose?
renown" is owing to’ greatness'* (and whose) origin” is owing to!* “Apam
Napat (i.e. the Navel of the waters)’’.

(Kardah 3) (5) Tishtrim! starem? raévantem’? khvarenanguhantem*
yazamaide®; yim® paitish-marente’ pasvascha® staoracha’? mashyacha”
paro-deresvan6", kaétacha” par6-druzintd'’, kadha-n6'* avi'® uzya-
rat’ Tishtryo'® raévao’” khvarenanguhao™”; kadha?! khao” aspo-
staoyehish* apam” tachaonti** nava”*.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim

starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide.

Haomayd gava baresmana hizv0-danghangha, manthracha vachacha
shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhatibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(5) We worship’ the Star’ Tishtrya', the radiant* and glorious*, whom’ the
cattle’, the beasts of burden? and men!? eagerly'! remember’ (when they) “are

si Dr. Geldner takes these five words occurring in the beginning of each para in the verse form
of two lines (Tishtrim starem ... yazamaide).
sj Its meaning can also be “situated on the top of the sky”.

sk As regards the explanation of “Apam Napat”, see my Avesta dictionary under the word
“Napat.”

sl i.e. They desire for the timely shower of rains, but by not being recipients unit they are de-
ceived.


--- Page 167 ---

TIR YASHT 151

deceived’? in (their) *“"wishes’.

When" will (the Star) Tishtrya'’, radiant’? and glorious”®, arise’’ to'® us'>?

When”! will the springs” of waters bigger than the size of a horse”* flow”
219
anew"!?

(Kardah 4) (6) Tishtrim! starem? raévantem’ khvarenanguhantem*
yazamaide*®; yo*’ avavat’ khshvaevo® vazaite’, avi'® zrayo' Vouru-
kashem”, yatha’ tighris'* mainyavasao’; yim'® anghat'’ Erekhsho™
khshvivi-ishush” khshvivi-ishvatemo”, airyanam”' airyo”, khshuthat”
hacha” garoit** khvanvantem” avi’’ gairim”®.

(6) We worship’ the radiant? and glorious* Star? Tishtrya!, which® flies?
“swiftly'® towards" the Sea'’ Vouru-kasha” as’ swiftly® as an arrow".

Explanation:- (The author then describes the speed of the arrow).

(Such as) amongst (all) the Iranians”’ there was'’ the best'? Iranian”
archer’’ *Erekhsha'’, the swiftest-archer”’. From the Mount® Khshutha*? (he
shot an arrow) to the Mount *Khvanvant.

(7) Tadha” dim*’ Ahurd Mazdio* avan? dat, tat! apd*,
urvaraoscha*, pairi-she’’ vouru-gaoyaoitish** Mithro® fradhayat”
pantam.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyO Tishtrim starem raévantem hvarenanguhantem
yazamaide.

Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha vacha-
cha shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshuhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

sm Kaeta = Vedic keta = wish; Besides if we compare kaeta with Sanskrit kita (=insects,
worms), it can be translated as under: for whom (i.e. for the coming of the rains) insects become
grieved (root drush) (because they will be destroyed).

sn Original meaning “going with anger” (Sanskrit Manyu “through the heavenly space”
(Darmesteter).

so Professor Darmesteter gives the following explanation about the archer named Erekhsha:-
This person is known in the Pahlavi books as “Aresh Shivatir”. The Pahlavi word Ervesh is of the
Avesta, “Erekhsho”. Shivatir (or Shipaktir) is the Pahlavi translation of the Avesta Khshviwi-
ishu (the swift archer). This person was the best archer in the Iranian army. When the Emperor
Minocheher and Afrasyab determined to make peace and fix the boundary between Iran and
Turan, it was stipulated that Erekhsha should ascend the Mount Khshutha (i.e. Damavand), and
discharge an arrow towards the East; the place where the arrow would fall should form the
boundary between the two kingdoms (Iran and Turan). Erekhsha shot an arrow accordingly the
flight continued from dawn to noon, when the arrow fell on the Mount Khvanvant (i.e.
Bamyana), from where a branch of the River Jihun (the River Balkha) starts. Later, the word
Aresh was applied to the best archer. The meaning of “Tire Areshi” hence became, i.e. the best
arrow.

sp Professor Darmesteter regards Khshutha as a part of the Mount Damavand and supposes the
Mount Khvanvant the same as the Mount Bamyana.


--- Page 168 ---

152 KHORDEH AVESTA

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

Moreover” the Creator*? Ahura Mazda*! “tas well as**, the waters** and
the plants** helped (Tishtrya). Meher (yazata)*’, the Lord of wide pastures**
opened” a wide way“! unto him*’.

(Kardah 5) (8) Tishtrim! starem? raévantem’? khvarenanguhantem*
yazamaide*; yo° pairikao’ taurvayeiti’, yO’ pairikao” titarayeiti'', yao”
staro'? keremao" patanti'’, antare’’ zim’ asmanemcha", zraya” Vouru-
kashaya”” amavato?! huraodhahe” zafrahe?? uruydpahe*. Badha’
vairiIm” acharaiti?” aspd-kehrpam” ashaonim” upacha*™ tao*! apo”
yaozyeiti®, aiwicha™ vata® vaonti** yaokhshtivanto*”’.

(7) We worship® the radiant* and glorious’ Star? Tishtrya', who® repels"
and puts to flight the witches’, who” flying between!® the earth’? and the
sky'* in “worm-shapped™ stars’? fall!> in the powerful*!, “well-known”,
deep (and) broad-watered™ “sea'? Vouru-kasha”. Tishtrya then enters the
Sea Vouru-kasha in the shape*® of a pure” “horse*’, stirs***? the?! waters?
violently and strong*’ winds*® blow® all around**.

(8) Aat®® tao apo” frashavayeiti*! Satavaéso® avi* haptd-karsh-
vairish“, vi ahva* yat jasaiti*’, sriro* hishtaiti* ramainivao™
huyairyao™ avi danghush®*. Kadha™ airyao* danghavo™ huyairyao”
bavaonti*’.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim

starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide.

Haomayd gava baresmana hizvo-danghangha, manthracha vachacha
shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhatibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

sq Compare tat with Latin “idem” = similarly, also.

sr i.e. in the shape of shooting stars; there seems to be a reference about the shooting stars.
ss huraodha = Sanskrit suruh = well-known, famous, seemly. “Large-sized” (Darmesteter).
st “Of salt waters” (Darmesteter).

su The significance of the shape of a horse is meant to show his excitement.


--- Page 169 ---

TIR YASHT 153

(9) (The Star) *Satavaesa” then *“causes*’ the*®? waters” to flow towards®
the seven regions“ (of the earth). (And Tishtrya) spreads all over***’ (those)
regions”, (and) stands” bestowing joy” and “prosperity*® upon “the fertile*!
countries* (and speaks)When*™ will the Iranian*> countries** become™®
fertile*’!

(Kardah 6) (10) Tishtrim! starem’ raévantem’ khvarenanguhantem*
yazamaide*; yo° aokhta’ Ahurai Mazdai® uityaojand’. Ahura Mazda"
Mainy6" Spénishta”, Datare’ gaéthanam” astvaitinam’ Ashaum", (11)
“Yedhi” zi'® ma’ mashyaka” aokhtd-namana”! yasna” yazayanta™
yatha™ anye* yazataonghd*® aokhtd-namana”’ yasna*® yazente” fra
nuroyo” ashavaoyo*! thwarshtahe? zruayat* shushuyam™, khvahe*
gayehe* khvanvato*’ ameshahe* upa-thwarshtahe® jaghmyam”;
aévam"! va avi khshapanem*, duye* va, panchasatem“ va, satem* va".

(10) We worship® the Star’ Tishtrya', radiant* and glorious*. Who® spoke’
unto Ahura Mazda*. O! Ahura Mazda", the Creator’? of the corporeal!*
world'*, Most beneficent’? Spirit!', Holy'®! (11) If!’ men” would worship”
me’? “with the famous”! yasna”, as they “worship” the other*> yazatas”®, I
would then certainly'* go*4 at the appointed” time” (to help) the righteous*’.
I would (certainly) go“ at the appointed*’ (time) of my own* beautiful?’
(and) immortal*® life**, (one*! night”, two* (nights), fifty** (nights) or“
hundred* (nights) as many times as necessary.

Explanation:- (Tishtrya yazata says: If men would worship me with the
yasna in which my own name is invoked, then I would render the world
prosperous and fertile by showering rain).

(12) Tishtrimcha”” yazamaide*, Tishtryaényascha® yazamaide™,
upa-paorimcha*! yazamaide™, paoiryaé-nyascha® yazamaide™; yazai*
ave stréush*’ yaa Haptoiringa®, paitishtatée® yathwam" pairika-
sv According to Bundahishn this star was considered as the leader of the western stars. Simil-
arly, the Star Tishtrya, the Star Vanant and Haptoiranga were regarded as the chieftains of the

eastern, southern and northern stars, respectively. As regards these four stars, see my Complete
Dictionary of the Avesta language.

sw The star Satavaesa helps Tishtrya in distributing the rain waters in different directions. From
this he has got the epithet frapa = (fra-ap), i.e. distributor of water, (see the beginning portion of
this yasht, note).

sx i.e. producing fertility on account of the gift of the rain, but due to the absence of rain re-
mained barren and desolate.

sy Sanskrit svi = prosperity, success, happiness, wealth, fortune.

sz The portion from “Yedhi zt’ to “Jaghmyam”’ is also contained in the 13th Kardah of Behram
yasht.

ta Or by means of the yazishn wherein their own names are invoked, i.e. by means of the
yazishn with the khshnuman of their names.

tb Or by means of the yazishn invoked by my own name, i.e. by means of the yazishn with the
khshnuman of my name.


--- Page 170 ---

154 KHORDEH AVESTA

namcha®. Vanantem® starem™ Mazdadhatem® yazamaide, amahecha”
paiti® hutashtahe® verethraghnahecha” paiti’ Ahuradhdatahe”,
vanaintyaoscha” paiti’* uparatato” vitare-anzahyehe”, paiti” vitare-
tbaéshahyehecha”®. Tishtrim” dravochashmanem® yazamaide*'.

(12) We worship* Tishtrya*’ and worship “the satellites pertaining to
Tishtrya®. We worship® (that) “foremost in rank*!. “We worship® the*
stars®’ which** (are) ‘Haptoiringa® to withstand® the wizards! and witches.
We worship® the Star “Vanant® created by Ahura Mazda® for (obtaining)®
(the well-shapen®) strength®’, (gaining) victory”, (getting) excellent’
superiority”, removing affliction’, and malice’. We worship*' Tishtrya” of
healthy eyes, shedding light afar.”

(13) Paoiryao” dasa® khshapand* Spitama*® Zarathushtra®,
Tishtry6* raévao* khvarenanguhao® kehrpem” raéthwayeiti’! raokhsh-
nushva” vazemno”, “narsh* kehrpa® pancha-dasangho”, khshaétahe”
spiti-doithrahe” berezat6” avi-amahe' amavato' hunairyaoncho’.

(13) O Spitaman*® Zarathushtra**! the first ten® nights* (of the month)
the radiant** (and) glorious® Tishtrya®’ assumes the form of the body”’*!
(and) is moving” ‘amidst the luminaries” in the shape® of a “man™ fifteen
years of age”, beautiful’’, of bright eyes’’, lofty size”, full of strength'”,

powerful! and manly™."

Explanation:- (It is stated below as to what sort of fifteen years of age
is.)

(14) Tat? ayaosh*, yatha® paoirim® virem’ avi-yao® bavaiti?. Tat"
ayaosh", yatha” paoirim’? virem™ avi-am6'* aéiti'®. Tat!’ ayaosh’,

tc i.e. a satellite in the constellation Canis Major; the good or the benefits derived from
Tishtrya” (Harlez); the rains of Tishtrya” (Darmesteter).

td i.e. The Star Tishtrya; in the 49" chapter of Menok-i Kherad, Tishtrya is regarded as the first
(see English translation of Dr. West p. 90). If this word is compared to Persian “Parvin”, then its
meaning can be “pleiades”’.

te i.e. Satellites in the constellation of Tishtrya.

tf “Haptoiringa” which is the chief of the stars of the North is compared with Ursa Major. It is
regarded as an opponent of the star (planet) Mars. For further details, see my Avesta dictionary,
p. 578.

tg Vanant: For its explanation, see glossary.
th i.e. Sharp-eyed, giving light afar.

ti These words, “narsh kehrpa pancha-dasangho khshaétahe spiti-ddithrahe” occur in the Kardah
6 of Beheram yasht in the description of one of the incarnations of Beheram yazata.

tj i.e. amidst the endless lights of the stars of the sky.
tk Or moving with good behaviour, “virtuous; brave” (Darmesteter).

tl Tishtrya assumes three forms - man, bull and horse, one after another, (see paragraphs 16and
18 of this yasht). The astrologers say that every constellation assumes a form (Darmesteter).


--- Page 171 ---

TIR YASHT 155

yatha”’ paoirim” virem?! erezusham” adaste”.

(14) ™Of that® age* when* a man’ first® becomes’ (active*); when’* a man"
first? "moves'® with courage’; and when’? he”! first”? “attains youthful
vigour” (or manliness”).

(15) H6* ithra? vyakhmanyeiti”, ho?’ ithra®® peresanyeiti”, ko*°
mam* niram® frayazaite* gaomavaitibyo* haomavaitibyo* zaothra-
byo*; kahmai*’ azem** dadham” viryam” ishtim“ viryam®’ vathwam*®
havahecha“ urund* yaozdathrem®. Niram*’ ahmi** yesnyascha”
vahmyascha” anguhe*! astvaite*, ashat hacha® yat vahishtat™.

(15) Here** the** (Tishtrya) convenes an assembly”® (and) asks” (the
members of the assembly); Now? who* will worship*? me*! with libations*®
provided with milk** and haoma**? Unto whom?’ shall I°* grant*? heroic’
wealth" (of sons) (and) heroic” multitude® (children) (and) purification of
his own“ soul*? Now*’ I am* worthy of worship” and adoration” in the
corporeal” world*' on account of righteousness*®.

(16) Bityao* dasa khshapano*’, Spitama*® Zarathushtra”, Tishtryo®
raévao* khvarenanguhao” kehrpem® raéthwayeiti“, raokhshnushva®
vazemno”, géush®” kehrpa® zaranyo-sravahe”.

(16) O Spitaman** Zarathushtra*®*! the second® ten®® nights*’ (of the
month) the radiant®! and glorious” Tishtrya® assumes the form of the body

* (and) moves amidst the luminaries® in the shape® of a golden-horned®
bull®”.

(17) Ho” ithra” vyakhmanyeiti”, ho’ ithra”’ peresanyeiti*’. Ko”
mam” niram” frayazaite”, gaomavaitibyo*” haomavaitibyo*' zaothra-
byo*. Kahmai® azem™ dadham® gaoyam® ishtim*’, gaoyam*
vathwam®, havaécha” urund”! yaozdathrem”’. Nuiram® ahmi™
yesnyascha® vahmyascha”® anguhe’’ astvaite’, ashat® hacha'” yat
vahishtat'.

(17) Here”! that” (Tishtrya) convenes an assembly” (and) here” he”
asks” (the members of the assembly);

Now” who” will worship” me” with libations” provided with milk® and

Haoma*'? Unto whom® shall I* grant** the bovine® wealth*’, herd® (and)
purification” of his own” soul’? Now™1 am™* worthy of worship® and
adoration’® in the corporeal’ world?’ on account of” extreme

tm If the word “tadha” instead of “tat” according to Dr. Geldner’s text is accepted, the meaning
of “tadha ayaosh” can be “that period of age, that time of life”; tadha = Sanskrit tada = then, at
that time.

tn Original meaning (is) moving or the mover. (Present participle).
to Attain manliness; adaste = 4 + dath + te; Sanskrit root 4 - da = to obtain; to get.

tp i.e. Valiant or heroic sons.


--- Page 172 ---

156 KHORDEH AVESTA

righteousness”.

(18) Thrityao? dasa’? khshapan6‘, Spitama*® Zarathushtra’‘, Tishtry9’
raévao® khvarenanguhao? kehrpem” raéthwayeiti'', raokhshnushva”
vazemno", “aspahe'* kehrpa aurushahe", srirahe!’ zairi-gaoshahe",
zarany0-aiwi-danahe”.

(18) O Spitaman?® Zarathushtra®! the third? ten? nights* (of the month) the
radiant* (and) glorious’ Tishtrya’ assumes the form of the body'*"' (and goes)
amidst the luminaries!” in the shape’ of a horse"*, crimson"®, beautiful!’, with
yellow ears'* (and) “golden caparison’’.

(19) Ho” ithra?? vyakhmanyeiti”?, hd? ithra% peresanyeiti?, ko”°
mam?’ niram’ frayazaite”, gaomavaitibyo” haomavaitibyo*' zaothra-
byo*. Kahmai*® azem™“ dadham* aspyam* ishtim*’, aspyam* vath-
wam*, havahécha” uruno*! yaozdathrem®. Niram*® ahmi“ yasnyascha*
vahmyascha“ anguhe” astvaite*, ashat® hacha™ yat vahishtat*'.

(19) Here?! (the Teshtrya) convenes an assembly”, (and) asks” (the
members of the assembly):-

Now’’ who” will worship” me?’ with libations® provided with milk* and

Haoma*'? To whom*’ shall I** grant*> wealth*’ relating to a horse*® a troop”
Sof horses** (and) purification” of his own“ soul*!? I am** worthy now® of
worship* and adoration*® in the corporeal*® world” on account of
righteousness”.

(20) Aat® paiti avaiti®’, Spitama™ Zarathushtra®. Tishtryo® raévao%”
khvarenanguhao® avi? zrayo® Vouru-kashem", aspahe” kehrpa® auru-
shahe® srirahe®, zairi-gaoshahe® zarany0-aiwi-danahe”.

(20) Then™, O Spitaman*™ Zarathushtra*! the radiant*’ (and) glorious’
Tishtrya® goes®* to® the "Sea® Vouru-kasha® in the shape® of a horse,
crimson™, beautiful®, with yellow ears® (and) golden caparison®’.

(21) “Adim® paiti-yash® nizdvaraiti® daévd" yo”? Apaoshd”,
aspahe”™ kehrpa’ samahe”, kaurvahe” kaurva-gaoshahe”, kaurvahe”
kaurvo-bareshahe™, kaurvahe*! kaurvé-dimahe®, daghahe®, aiwidato-
tarshtdish*.

tq From here up to “zarany6-aiwi-danahe” Dr. Geldner takes as a verse of three lines; each line
ends at the comma (,).

tr With a golden collar, with a golden necklace (Harlez); with a golden caparison (Darmesteter),
cf. para 46 of this yasht.

ts Whatever form Tishtrya assumes, he grants to his invoker the same kind of gift, (see paras 13-
19 of this yasht).

tt In order to render prosperity on the earth by causing rains after taking waters from it.

tu Dr. Geldner takes the entire para 21 in verse form of seven lines; each line ends at a comma

().


--- Page 173 ---

TIR YASHT 157

(21) (But in the meantime) the counter-fiend® (of Tishtrya) the demon”!
“Apaosha”, rushes down” to him® in the shape” of a horse”, black’®,
“speckled”’, with spotted ears”, spotted back, tail® and terrific® brand (or a
scar)*.™

(22) Ham-tachit-bazush® baratd**, Spitama*®’ Zarathushtra® Tish-
tryascha® raévao” khvarenanguhao”! daévascha” yo”? Apaosho™. Tao”
yuidhyatho"', Spitama” Zarathushtra®’, thri-ayarem”, thrikhshapa-
rem, Adim! bavati? aiwi-aojao’, adim‘ bavaiti’ aiwi-vany4o° daévo’ yo*
Apaosho’ Tishtrim'’’ raévantem" khvarenanguhantem”. Apa’ dim™
adhat'> vyeiti!®’ zrayanghat'’’ hacha'’® vouru-kashat”, hathro-masang-
hem” adhvanem”'.

(22) (Then) O Spitaman®’ Zarathushtra®! the radiant’ (and) glorious*!
Tishtrya® and the demon” Apaosha™ “seize* or grasp each other, they fight”®
for three days” and three nights'”; the demon’, Apaosha’ having succeeded?
over the radiant” and glorious’? Tishtraya'®, "becomes victorious®, (and) from
there’’, the sea'’'* Vouru-kasha”’ drives him'* away'*!® one farsang”’ along
the course”!.

(23) Sadrem” urvishtremcha” nimriite“ Tishtry0* raévao” khvare-
nanguhao’’. Sadrem”> me” Ahura Mazda*, urvishtrem*! apo” urvar-
aoscha*, bakhtem™ daéne** Mazdayesne*. Noit’? mam* niram® mash-
yaka®” aokht6d-namana“' yasna” yazente*, yatha“ anye* yazataongho
aokhto-namana” yasna*® yazente”.

(23) (Then the radiant”® (and) glorious”’ Tishtrya”> speaks with humility™
about his “woe” and defeat**:-

O Ahura Mazda**! Woe” unto me”! O Waters* and plants**! (there is my)
defeat*'! O Mazda-worshipping* Religion**! (my) fate** (or misfortune*)!

Men” do not*’ worship* me** now with the famous*’ yasna® as“ they

worship” other** yazatas*°."

(24) Yeidhi® zr' ma” mashyéka™ aokhtd-namana™ yasna* yaza-

tv Original meaning - he who burns the watery or rainy clouds; the demon of drought; the de-
mon doing quite the opposite from Tishtrya; root ush = Sanskrit ush = to burn.

tw Sanskrit Karvu, karvura; “bald” (Spiegel). I have not translated the word Kaurvahe which is
repeated twice.

tx Original meaning whereby the terror is struck”, dreadful.
ty Or adhere. Original meaning “seizes” (Sans, root bhru).
tz In the original sense becomes smitten and becomes triumphant.

. ss . ; i
ua Just as from the Persian word “dard” (pain) the meaning of “darda’” becomes “woe”, in the
same way, there occurred the meaning of “sadrem”’.

ub Or by means of the yasna in which their own names are invoked, i.e. by means of the yasna
with the “khshnuman” of their names.


--- Page 174 ---

158 KHORDEH AVESTA

yanta™, yatha’’ anye® yazataongho” aokhtd-namana® yasna" yazente”,
“avi? mam” avi-bavrayam®, dasanam® aspanam™ aojo®, dasanam®
ushtranam” aojo”, dasanam” gavam” aojo™“, dasanam”™ gairinam”
aojo”, dasanam”® apam” navayanam”®™ aojo*".

(24) For*', if? men® would worship*’ me* with the famous™ yasna* as*”
they worship” other® yazatas®, I"? should have brought® to me the
strength® of ten” horses®’, ten® camels”, the strength” of ten” oxen”, ten
mountains”, and (and) the strength®’ of “the waters” of ten’ canals (or
rivers)*’.

(25) Azem® yo* Ahurd* Mazdao*® Tishtrim® raévantem®’ khvare-
nanguhantem® aokhtd-namana® yasna” yaze”! avi” dim* avi-barami™
dasanam® aspanam” aojo”, dasanam®® ushtranam” aojo'™, dasanam!
gavam’ aojo*, dasanam* gairinam’ aojo°, dasanam’ apam® navayanam’
aojo"’.

(25) (Ahura Mazda speaks):- I “Ahura Mazda***> (Having learnt the wish
from Tishtrya), the radiant®’ and glorious**, and “‘worshipped*' with the
famous® yasna”, carried™ for him®*? (i.e. gave him) the strength®’ of ten’
horses”, camels”, ten' oxen’, tent mountains? (and) waters® of ten’ canals (or
rivers)’.

(26) ““Aat paiti avaiti, Spitama Zarathushtra, Tishtryd raevao
khvarenanguhao, avi zrayO Vouru-kashem, aspahe kehrpa aurushahe
srirahe, zairi-gaoshahe zarany0-aiwi-danahe. (27) 4dim paiti-yash nizd-
varaiti daévd yO Apaoshd, aspahe kehrpa sAmahe, kaurvahe kaurvo-
gaoshahe, kaurvahe kaurvo-bareshahe, kaurvahe kaurvd-dimahe,
daghahe aiwidato-tarshtoish.

(28) Ham-tachit-bazush! baratd’, Spitama Zarathushtra’,
Tishtryascha‘* raévao* khvarenanguhao® daévascha’ yo® Apaosho’. Tao”
yuidhyatho" Zarathushtra”, 4° rapithwinem™ zrvanem'. Adim'®
bavaiti’ aiwi-aojao", adim’” bavaiti? aiwi-vanyao”' Tishtryo” raévao™
khvarenanguhao™ daéum”* yim” apaoshem”’ Apa”® dim” adhat* vyeiti*!

uc Dr. Geldner from here up to the end of this paragraph takes the verse of six lines; each line
ends with a comma (,).

ud Or the strength of the navigable (Sans. Navya) waters.

ue i.e. I would have got the strength of ten horses, camels, etc., and on account of that strength I
would have defeated the demon Apaosha.

uf For its explanation, see Zartosht-namun, written by Sheth Kh. R. Cama, Second Edition,
pages 155-158.

ug In original form these two verbs are in the present tense; for its explanation, see my Avesta
Grammar, p. 304. Besides, “‘yaze” can be imperfect tense first person singular atmanepada as
well.

uh As regards the translation of paragraphs 26-27, see paragraphs 20-21 of this same yasht.


--- Page 175 ---

TIR YASHT 159

zrayanghat” hacha® Vouru-kashat™, hathro-masanghem* adhvanem*.

(28) (Then) O Spitaman Zarathushtra*! the radiant? (and) glorious®
Tishtrya* (and) the demon’ Apaosha® grapple each other by the arm!’ and
fight" till’? noon’*. The radiant” and glorious™ Tishtrya” having succeeded'®
over” the demon, Apaosha”’ becomes” victorious”', (and) from the sea?”

Vouru-kasha™ drives’ *! him”? away one farsang* along the course*®.

(29) “Ushtatatem*’ nimriite**, Tishtryd” raévao” khvarenanguhao“.
Ushta” me* Ahura Mazda“, ushta* apd“ urvaraoscha*’, ushta** daene”
Mazdayesne™, ushta*! v6 abavat® danghavo™, us® vo apam*’ adhavo™*
apaitieretao® jasdonti®, ash-danunamcha® yavanaim®, kasu-danu-
namcha® vastranam™, gaéthanamcha® astavaitinam”.

(29) Then the radiant® and glorious"! Tishtrya® proclaims** “the victory*”
gained by him*’. O Ahura Mazda“! Hail” (be) unto me*! O Waters*® and
plants*’! Hail** (unto me)! O Religion® of Mazda-worship™! (there arose my)
victory“! O Countries™! (now) there will be™ prosperity*! unto you™!
“Hereafter” the “food**, corns* grown through abundant water®', green
vegetables“ (or herbaceous plants) grown through little water® and (the
entire) corporeal® settlements® will grow “up*® without difficulty®.

Explanation:- Its significance is that owing to the victory of Tishtrya
over Apaosha, the demon of drought, there will he abundant growth of corns,
vegetables, etc., through the assurance of sufficient rains and thereby people
and cattle will enjoy complete happiness.

(30) Aat®” paiti® avaiti®, Spitama” Zarathushtra”, Tishtryo”
raévao” khvarenanguhao” avi’ zrayO Vouru-kashem”, aspahe”®
kehrpa” aurushahe® srirahe*, zairi-gaoshahe” zarany0-aiwi-danahe*®.

(30) Then®’’, O Spitaman” Zarathushtra”! the radiant’ and glorious”
Tishtrya” goes®’ to the sea’ Vouru-kasha” in the shape” of a horse”,
crimson™, beautiful®!, with yellow ears® (and) golden caparison®.

ui Dr. Geldner takes the entire paragraph 29 in verse form of 11 lines; each line ends with in
comma (,) and full-stop (.).

uj The meaning of “ushtatat” is happiness, prosperity, congratulation”.

uk This word (apam) occurs in the yasna Ha 9, para 24, and Ha 10, para 1, in the same sense. As
a noun its meaning is “of the waters”.

ul “Adhavo” - root adh, ad = Sanskrit ad = Lat. Ed-ere = to eat.

um The gift of the waters (apam adhavo) will flow down unrestrained to the big-seeded corn-
fields, to the small-seeded pasture-fields and to the whole of the material world” (Darmesteter).
Dr. Spiegel and Professor Harlez also have translated generally in the similar sense as under:
“The streams of the waters will flow towards the field, etc.” Ash-danu yava” = corns grown by
means of abundant water, or the corns for the ripening of which abundant waters are required.
Danu = Sanskrit danu = river, (see danu-drajangha, yasna Ha 60, para 4).


--- Page 176 ---

160 KHORDEH AVESTA

(31) “o* zrayo® 4-yaozayeiti*®*, ho*’ zrayd* vi-vaozayeiti®, ho”
zrayo”' aghzradhayeiti”, ho’ zrayo™ vighzradhayeiti*, ho’ zrayo”
aghzarayeiti®®, ho” zrayd'” vighzarayeiti', yaozenti? vispe’ karand*,
zrayai> Vouru-kashaya’, a’ vispo® maidhy0o? yaozaiti'®.

(31) He®™ (i.e. Tishtrya) causes the sea** (Vouru-kasha) “to be agitated*®,
to "surge exceedingly®, he” causes (the waters of) the sea” to overflow”;
“lexceedingly', the flowing waters then unite together’ with all’ the shores* of
the sea’ Vouru-kasha®. The entire® middle part’ too “unites (with waters).

(32) Us" paiti’ adhat'’ hishtaiti'’, Spitama'’ Zarathushtra”,
Tishtryo!’ raévad'® khvarenanguhao”, zrayanghat” hacha?! Vouru-
kashat”. Us”? adhat*4 hishtat?> Satavaéeso”’ raévao”’ khvarenanguhao”*,
zrayanghat” hacha*® Vouru-kashat*!. Aat? tat?? dunman* ham-
hishtenti*> us** hindavat*’ paiti*® gardit®, yo hishtaite’’ maidhim®
zrayangho* Vouru-kashahe“.

(32) Then'’, O Spitaman'> Zarathushtra'®! the radiant!’ (and) glorious'®
Tishtrya’’ rises up''"'* from the sea”?! Vouru-kasha”, and the radiant’ (and)
glorious” (Star) “Satavaesa”® (too) rises up**?> from the Sea?*° Vouru-
kasha*'; then” vapours* (or mists)** having gathered arise** from the Mount”
“Us-hindava***’ which® stands" in the middle” of the sea*? Vouru-kasha™.

(33) Aat* tat dunman‘’  frashaupayeiti*® maéghd“-kara™
ashavano"|, fra pourvo* vatam™ vazaiti*, ya*® patho°’ aiti®® Haomo”
frashmish® fradhat-gaétho"'. Athra® paschaéta® vazaite* vato%
darshish® Mazdadhato”, varemcha® maéghemcha® fyanghumcha”,
avi’! asao”, avi’ shoithrao” avi karshvan” yaish” hapta’.

(33) (Tishtrya) then* (arranges) “the cloud*-forming® pure*! vapours*’
“to push forward*’. Tishtrya brings* first? the wind* which (the yazata)

un Dr. Geldner takes the entire para 31 in the verse form of mine lines: each line ends at the
comma (,).

uo i.e. causes the tide in the sea Vouru-kasha.
up Vivaozayeiti = vi-yaozayeiti; or causes to ebb or to recede.

ugq Ghz:. (khshar = Sanskrit khshar = to flow), ghzar by adding d at the end of the root; became
“ghzard”. In the meaning of both these there must be slight difference.

ur Its significance appears to be that at the time of tide the Sea Vouru-kasha becomes full of wa-
ter from all sides.

us According to the writing of the Bundehesh, Satavaesa is the principal star of the West.

ut Dr. Haug supposes this Mount Hindava to be Hindu Kush. In the twelfth chapter of the
Bundehesh there occurs a name of the mountain “‘ Us-hindum” similar to this. In Avesta, adverb
Us is prefixed to the word “Hindava”, and taking “us” with the Hindava, European scholars
have regarded it as one name “Us-hindum”.

uu The exact Sanskrit equivalent of the Avesta “maeghokara” is “meghakara”.

uv “Frashaupayeiti” - present causal third person singular parasmaipada; root shu = to go; its


--- Page 177 ---

TIR YASHT 161

Haoma”®, the prosperity-bringer® (and) the increaser of the world®
traverses*®. Afterwards® the strong® wind® created by Ahura Mazda‘’ causes
to reach the rain®, the clouds® and sleet” to” (various) places”, to” the
cities” (and) to” (the entire) seven” regions of the earth’®.

(34) Apam” Napaose*® tao*! apo”, Spitama*® Zarathushtra®™, anguhe*
astvaite®* shoithré-bakhtao*’ vibakhshaiti®, vatascha® yo” darshish”’,
awzdatemcha” khvaren6”’ ashaonamcha™ fravashayo”>.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyd Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana hizvo-danghangha, manthracha,
vachacha ~_ shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha —_arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(34) O Spitaman* Zarathushtra™! Apara” ““Napat*® divides all around*
those®! waters’ which are to be distributed in (each) city*’ in (the
entire)corporeal*® world®; the strong*' wind*’, the ““Glory® created from the
waters” and “the Fravashis” of the righteous (people)”* (as well).

(Kardah 7) (35) Tishtrim! starem’ raévantem’ khvarenanguhantem*
yazamaide*; yo° avadhat’ fravazaite® khshdithnyat’? hish'® ushayat"
diraé-urvaésem” paiti’? pantém', baghd-bakhtem’ paiti'® yaonem”
frathvarshtem' paiti!? afentem2, zaoshai?’ Ahurahe Mazdao,” zaoshai??
Ameshanam Spentanam”.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana, hizv0-danghangha, manthracha
vachacha —_ shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha —_arshukhdhaeibyaseha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(35) We worship’ the radiant? (and) glorious‘ Star? Tishtrya', who° for the

causal form “shaupaya” (to drive away, to push forward). For its explanation, see my Avesta
Grammar, pages 250-251.

uw Apam Napat (Sanskrit apam napat), i.e. the navel of waters or the source of waters. For its
explanation, see my Avesta dictionary, under the word napat’.

ux 1.e. Kayanian Glory, whose location is in the sea Vouru-kasha (see Zamyat yasht, paragraphs
56-64).

uy Amongst the co-workers of Tir there come Ardafravash and Govad, its reference can be seen
from this paragraph. For comparison, see Farvardin yasht, para 66.


--- Page 178 ---

162 KHORDEH AVESTA

joy?’ of (the Creator) Ahura Mazda” (and) “for the joy* of the
Ameshaspands™, goes from the shining? Eastern “direction'' to’ the
distantended’? path'*, up to’® the aerial space'’ bestowed by God" (and) up
to!” the fixed place”’ appointed'*.””

(Kardah 8) (36) Tishtrim! starem’ raévantem’ khvarenanguhantem*
yazamaide*; yim® yare-charesho’ mashyahe*® ahuracha’ khratugito”
aurunacha" gairishao’?  sizdracha’  ravascharato'* uzydrentem'*
hispdsentem"; huyairyacha”’ dainghave'* uz-jasentem” duzyairyacha”.
Kadha”! airyao” dainghavo* huyairyao” bavaonti*.

We worship°® the radiant? and glorious* Star? Tishtrya'. For whose®
rising,!> men® “‘who live in the fruits of the year’, and the chiefs “of deep
understanding’®, the wild beasts’! wandering on the mountains’, the
hedgehogs’, and the animals that wander wild at large’* “desire eagerly'®.
Because, the way it rises’’, (it becomes) the year of fertility’’ (or) the year of
famine”’ for the country’*. Besides, they wish that”! the Iranian?’ countries”
may “become” fertile’4 (or prosperous)!

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana hizvd-danghangha, manthracha
vachacha ~_ shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha —_arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah 9) (37) Tishtrim! starem’ raévantem’ khvarenanguhantem*
yazamaide’. Asu-khshvaévem® khshvivi-vazem’, yO avavat khshvaévo
vazaite, avi zrayO Vouru-kashem, yatha tighrish mainivasao, yim anghat
Erekhsho khshvivi-ishush khshvivi-ishvatem6O airyanam airyd, khshu-
that hacha garoit khvantem avi gairim.

(37) We worship® the Star’ Tishtrya', radiant’, glorious’, swift-flying®
uz i.e. At the will of the Creator Ahura Mazda and the Ameshaspand and by obeying their com-
mand.

va As regards the explanation of the word “‘afentem” see my translation of the Vendidad, fargard
21st para 5 note.

vb Professors Spiegel and Harlez affixing the word “hish” to the water translate thus: “Tishtrya
brings the water”.

ve Original meaning those who go by the season (lit. the year); root char = to go; nominative
plural of yare-charesh.

vd Or wisdom-increasing.
ve Or “await eagerly”; original “(are) desiring”.

vf I have translated this paragraph generally based on Professor Darmesteter’s translation.


--- Page 179 ---

TIR YASHT 163

(and) swift-moving’.”?

(38) Avi*! dim*? Ahur6 Mazdao* avan*4, Ameshao Spenta**, vouru-
gaoyaoitish** he? Mithrd** pouru-pantam® frachaéshaétem*. Adim*!
paskat” anu-marezatem® Ashishcha“ Vanguhi* berezaiti**, Parendi-
cha” raoratha®, vispem 4 ahmat” yat* amem‘*! paiti-apayat” vazemno*
khvanvantem™ avi gairlIm®* khvanvata* paiti* nirat®.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana hizvd-danghangha, manthracha
vachacha ~_ shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha —_arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(38) The Creator Ahura Mazda* helped** (Tishtrya) him*!*’; the
Ameshaspentas* (i.e. the Bountiful Immortals)** and Meher*® (yazata) the
Lord of wide pastures** “prepared*? (or opened) for him>’ the sufficient
way; the good* (and) exalted** Ashishvang*** (and) Parendi*’ (or light)
chariot** “cleaned or wiped off* (the path) for him*! until*? he came up”
running up to the Mount** Khvanvant*’.

(Kardah 10) (39) Tishtrim! starem? raévantem’ khvarenanguhantem‘
yazamaide*; y0° pairikao’ taurvayeiti®, yo’ paitrikao” titarayeiti'’ yao”
uzaonghat® Angrd Mainyush", mamanush", staram’* afsh-chithranam”’
vispanam'® paiti-eretée”’.

(39) We worship® the Star’ Tishtrya', radiant’ and glorious*; who’ afflicts®
and “idestroys!! the pairikas’ (or drives out!'), whom”? (i.e. the pairikas) the
Angra Mainyu - the Evil Spirit caused to stand up’? in order to oppose”? all’®
the Stars'® containing the seed of waters!’, ““intentionally">.

(40) “Tao” Tishtryd”! taurvayeiti??, vivaiti? hish’* zrayanghat?®
hacha” Voura-kashat?’. Aat?® maégha” us-fravaonte” huyairyao*! apo”
barentish*, yahva™ urvaitish*® awrdo* perethu®’ aipi*® vyasaitish*’, avo-
vg For the translation of the remaining portion, see Karda 4 of this yasht above.

vh “frachaéshaétem” and ‘“‘anu-marezatem’”, these two verbs are in parasmaipada dual; the first
in potential mood and the second in imperfect tense.

vi Behind him went “‘Ashishvangh and Parendi”, (Darmesteter). I have not understood the entire
meaning of “Khvanvata paiti nirat”. “On the shining waters” (Darmesteter): “at the brilliant
place of its setting” (Harlez). Sanskrit nira = water.

vj See Karda 5, para 8 of this yasht.
vk “Mamanush” - root man = Sanskrit man = to know, to think; derived from ““mamanvangh”’.

vl Dr. Geldner takes the entire 40" paragraph in the verse form of seven lines; each line ends
with comma (,) and full-stop (.).


--- Page 180 ---

164 KHORDEH AVESTA

urvaitish® hapta*! karshvan*.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana, hizv0-danghangha, manthracha
vachacha ~_ shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha —_arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(40) Tishtrya’! afflicts” them”? (i.e. pairikas) and ‘““blows™ them™ away”
from the Sea***® Vourukasha’’. The clouds” of the fertile year*' (and) the
waters” producing (fruits and corns) gather them*’ on high*’, from which*
prosperity-bestowing*® and ““happiness-bringing*”’ abundant*’ rain-showers*®
spread “°wide*? over the seven*’ regions” (i.e. over the entire earth).

(Kardah 11th) (41) Tishtrim! starem? raévantem’? khvarenangu-
hantem‘* yazamaide*®; yim*® 4p06’ paitish-marente® armaéshtao’, fratat-
charatascha”™, khanyaéo"! thraotd-statascha”, parshuy4o® vairyaoscha"*.

(41) We worship® the radiant? and glorious* Star! Tishtrya*, whom® the
stagnant’ waters’, running and flowing!® waters’, the well” waters’, the
spring’? waters’, the waters’ of running stream’, dew-dripping’? waters’ and
the ‘’rain'* waters’ remember® eagerly.

(42) “Kadha'-no' avi’? uzayarat'*, Tishtryd’ raévao”
khvarenanguhao”’. Kadha” khao” aspd-staoyehish™, apam? ghzaram”*
aiwighzarem”’, sriraoscha” as6-shdithraoscha” gaoyaoitishcha®” Ata-
chintish*', 4 vareshajish” urvaranam’, siira** vakhshyente® vakhsha”.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana, hizv0-danghangha, manthracha,
vachacha ~~ shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha —_arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

vm i.e. scatters away (in the sense of English blows away).
vn Original meaning “help-bringing, help-giving”.

vo In the original form this word (vijasaitish) is in the present participle first person plural fem-
inine and qualifies ‘“awrao” (spreading wide).

vp For comparison, see yasna Ha 68, para 6.

vq Dr. Geldner takes the entire para 42 in the verse form of eight lines; each line ends at comma
(,) and full-stop (.).


--- Page 181 ---

TIR YASHT 165

(42) When’ will the radiant”? (and) glorious” Tishtrya’’ rise '* for us!°?
When” will the springs”? with a flow” (and) overflow”’ of waters” bigger
than the horse™ run*! to the beautiful*® places and cities”’? (so that) the
trunks” of the trees* may grow* with (a powerful)* intense growth*®.

(Kardah 12th) (43) Tishtrim! starem’? raévantem’? khvarenangu-
hantem‘ yazamaide*; y0° vispaish’ naénizaiti*® simao’ apaya'; vazedh-
rish" ukhshyeiti? vispaose-tao’ daman!* baéshzyaticha 'sévishtd"’;
yezi'® aém” bavaiti”’ yashto”' khshnitd” fritho” paiti-zanto™.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazmaide. Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha,
vachacha, shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(43) We worship*® the Star' Tishtrya’, radiant? (and) glorious*, who®
“cleanses*® all’ dreadful things’? (contained) in water'®; when'® he! (i.e.
Tishtrya) is”? worshipped', pleased”, loved’? (and) honoured™, the
“Spowerful'’ (and) most beneficent!’ (Tishtrya) then renders” this'* entire’?
creation'* prosperous’, and “revives'® (it).

(Kardah 13th) (44) “Tishtrim! starem? raévantem’> khvare-
nanguhantem* yazamaide*, yim® ratiim’ paiti-daémcha®, vispaésham?
staram”, fradathat"' Ahur6é Mazdao', yatha’’ naram' zarathushtrem'*
yim’® noit!’ mereghente'’® angrd mainyush”, ndit?® yatavo?' pairi-
kaoscha”, noit? yatavo™ mashyanam” naédha” vispe”’ hathra’* daéva”’
mahrkathai* upa-dareznvanti*'.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana, hizv0-danghangha, manthracha
vachacha ~_ shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha —_arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
vr i.e. renders it quite undefiled by removing the dirt, filth and impurities from the water, root
niz = Sanskrit “nij” = to cleanse.

vs Vazedrish - root Sanskrit vaj = “to be powerful, to strengthen; industrious” (Justi); “shealth-
giving” (Spiegel).
vt Original meaning “bestows health” (baéshazyaticha); denominative verb.

vu Dr. Geldner takes the entire 44" para in verse form of eleven lines; each line ends with
comma (,) and full stop (.).


--- Page 182 ---

166 KHORDEH AVESTA

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(44) We worship*® the radiant? and glorious* Star’ Tishtrya'. Just as’? (the
Creator) Ahura Mazda” established"! (the Prophet) Zarathushtra’* (as a Lord)
over men" (and the overseer above them), the same way He has established'!
“Tishtrya® as the Lord’ and overseer® above all the stars'°. Explanation: (As
regards the Holy Zarathushtra a further explanation is made below):-

Whom!* (i.e. the Prophet Zarathushtra) the Angra Mainyu’? (or)
bewitching”’ sorceresses” (or) “bewitching** men’ together’ with all?’ the
daevas” could not!’ kill’ (or) “dare?! to kill?®.

(Kardah 14) (45) Tishtrim! starem? raévantem’ khvarenanguhantem*
yazamaide*®; yahmai® hazangrem’ yaokhshtinam’, fradathat? Ahurod
Mazdao", afshchithraeshva" sevishtai'?, yo'? afsh-chithraeibyo" aiti'
raokhshnushva'’ vazemno!’.

(45) We worship the radiant* and glorious‘ star? Tishtrya', to whom’ the
most beneficent’’, (the Creator) Ahura Mazda’? gave a thousand-fold’
“strength “amongst those having the seed of water''! who!’ (i.e. Tishtrya)
moving'’ amongst the luminaries’® (of the sky) goes'> towards the stars
containing the seed of waters'*.

(46) ““Ho® zrayangh6o” Vouru-kashahe”, amavato”' huraodhahe”,
jafrahe® uruyapahe”, vispe* vairish”* 4-charaiti’’, vispescha” srire”’ ni-
mraoke™, vispescha*! srire” apaghzara*’, aspahe* kehrpa* aurushahe”,
srirahe’’ zairi-gaoshahe*, zarany0-aiwi-danahe”.

(46) He'® (i.e. Tishtrya) goes?’ to all> “the waters”® and to the entire”®
magnificent” (or splendid) “‘water-fall*° and to all*! the beautiful*’ channels*?
of the powerful’', famed’, deep*? (and) broad-watered™ Vouru-kasha”, in the
shape*® of a horse**, crimson**’, beautiful*’, with golden ears** (and) golden
caparison*’.

(47) Aat* apd’ ava-barente”, Spitama® Zarathushtra“, zrayang-

vv Original meaning “whom,” i.e. Tishtrya.
vw i.e. Deceiver, entrapper into temptation.

vx Sanskrit root drush = to dare, “dursa’”, its English equivalent to dare. For further explanation
see Vendidad Fargard IX, paras 1-9 and paras 43-47.

vy i.e. Amongst the stars. For its explanation see paras 4 and 39 of this yasht and para 13th of
Vendidad fargard XXI.

vz Original meaning “fixed a thousand of strengths”.
wa Dr. Geldner takes para 46 in the verse-form of 9 lines and para 47 in the verse-form of 8

lines; each line ends with comma (,).

6 a?

wb i.e. On the entire surface of the sea Vouru-kasha, vairi = Sanskrit “vari” = water.

we Nimraoka - Sanskrit root ni-mruch = to go down, to flow down. “Caves” (Darmesteter);

29 66

channels” (Spiegel); “flowing outside”, “canal of waters” (Justi).


--- Page 183 ---

TIR YASHT 167

hat*® hacha** Voura-kashat*’, tatao* urvathrao” baéshazayao™, tao*!
avadha™ vibakhshaiti® aby6™ danghubyo™ sévishto*, yathas’ aém*®
bavaiti® yasht6®, khshnito” fritho® paiti-zanto®.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana, hizv0-danghangha, manthracha
vachacha ~_ shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha —_arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(47) O Spitaman*? Zarathushtra! when*’ he*®* (i.e. Tishtrya) (is)
worshipped®, pleased*', loved® (and) welcomed", (he), the most beneficent*
having brought” the flowing", efficacious” (and) healing® waters*’ from the
Sea*“*, Vouru-kasha*’, distributes the water?! hither’ thither and, every
where® in the countries.

(Kardah 15) (48) Tishtrim! starem? raévantem’ khvarenanguhantem*
yazamaide*; yim® vispaish’ paitish-marente® yaish? Spentahe
Mainyéush” daman", adhairi-zemaishcha”, upairi-zemaishcha™, yacha
upapa™, yacha upasma', yacha frapterejan’, yacha ravascharan”,
yacha upairi"® tao” akarana” anaghra”! ashaonO” stish”’ aidhi**.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha,
vachacha ~_ shyaothnacha, = zaothrabyascha —_arshukhdhaéibyascha
vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(48) We worship® the radiant* (and) glorious‘ Star’ Tishtrya*. Whom’ all’
the creations’! of the Beneficent Spirit!’ (such as), those that live under the
ground”, and those that live above the ground’, ““those that live in the
waters’, those that fly in “the air’’, (or winged birds'®), those that wander
wild at large!’ and" “*other** innumerable” “endless”! creations” of Holy

wd Yacha upapa - its original meaning is “‘and those that live in waters”.

we i.e. “those living away from the ground”, “those that remain in the air”. The meaning of
“upasma” (deriving from Upa + zema) can be “living on the ground”.

wf Upairi - Sanskrit Upari - besides, in addition to.
wg Aidhi = Sanskrit adi = other, etc.

wh Akarana = endless, without an end; anaghra = without a beginning.


--- Page 184 ---

168 KHORDEH AVESTA

(Ahura Mazda), remember eagerly’.

(Kardah 16) (49) “'Tishtrim' Starem? raévantem? khvarenangu-
hantem’ yazamaide*, thamananguhantem’, varechanguhantem’,
yaokhshtivantem® hshayamnem’, isanem” hazangrai'' 4ayaptanam”™. Yo"
dadhaiti'* kukhshnavanai', pourush’® ayaptao'’ jaidhyantai', ajaidh-
yamnai’’ mashyai”.

(49) We worship® the Star? Tishtrya', the radiant’, the glorious’, health-
giving’, pompous’, powerful’, ruling’, predominant over a thousand gifts”,

who! grants'* many!® boons'” prayed for or not prayed for“! to that man?°
“kwho has pleased him!>.

(50) Azem?! dadham”, Spitama”® Zarathushtra“, aom* starem”
yim” Tishtrim” avaontem*’ yesnyata*!, avaontem® vahmyata*®, avaon-
tem* khshnaothvata*, avaontem* frasastata*®’, yatha** mamchit® yim”
Ahurem Mazdam".

(50) O Spitaman® Zarathushtra™! I?! “have created”? this star”
Tishtrya” as* worthy of worship*', adoration’, propitiation®, and
glorification*’ *"as** Myself? — Ahura Mazda’.

Explanation:- (Why Tishtrya was created so great, is mentioned below).

(51) Avanghao® pairikayao* paitishtatayaécha“, paitischaptayaé-
cha* paititaretayaécha“, paityaoget*’-tbaéshahyaicha®, ya” duzyairya™,
yam*! mashyaka” avi duzvachangho® huyairyam™ nama® aojaite™.

(51) (I have created the Star Tishtrya as worthy of worship and adoration
like Myself) in order to withstand“, destroy* and drive out* this* Pairika®
“"Duz yairya”’ whom” wicked® persons” call by the name* Huyairya™,
and”? to prevent malice®.

wi Dr. Geldner takes this whole paragraph in the verse form of 8 lines.

wj Original meaning “unto one who asks for, unto one who does not ask for”.
wk The reduplicated form of the root khshnu (=to please) became “kukhshnu”.
wl i.e. as I who am Ahura Mazda, like Myself too.

wm Similar statement occurs for Meher yazata, too, with slight difference (see Meher yasht,
para 1).

wn i.e. Famine-producing; original meaning “pertaining to bad year’. After the Avesta, during
the period of Cuneiform Inscriptions, the Emperor Darius wishing prosperity for his own king-
dom from the Creator Ahura Mazda prays May the Lord protect my kingdom from the hostile
army and from the famine (hacha dushiyar)!” That inscription is as follows: Uta imam dahyaum
Aura Mazda patuva hacha hainaya, hacha dushiyar, hacha drauga ...... (see the writing
numbered H of Persepolis). Meaning:- (The Emperor Darius prays:) Also may Ahura Mazda
protect this kingdom (of mine) from the hostile army, from famine and from falsehood- deceit.

wo Original meaning “evil speaking”, from it “speaking quite contrary”.

wp Original meaning in order to withstand the malice, (root paiti-vaz).


--- Page 185 ---

TIR YASHT 169

(52) Yedhi*’ zi* azem™® noit® daidhyam*', Spitama® Zarathushtra®,
aom™ starem® yim® Tishtrim®’, avaontem® yesnyata® avaontem”
vahmyata” avaontem” khshnaothvata”™, avaontem” frasastata”™, yatha”
mamchit” yim” Ahurem Mazdam”.

(53) Avanghao*® pairikayao*' paitishtatayaécha”, paitischapta-
yaécha®; paititaretayaécha™, paityaoget*-tbaéshahyaicha™®, ya®’ duz-
yairya®; yam® mashyaka” avi duzvachangho”' huyairyam”’ nama ”
aojaite™.

(54) Hamahe” zi’ me” idha® ayan” hamayao'™ va! khshap6’, hao*
pairika* ya>S duzyairya® vispahe’ anghéush*® astvatd?  parodit'’
pairithnem", anghvam” ava-hisidhyat” acha pairicha™ dvaraiti'>.

(52-53) For® if’ 1°, O Spitaman® Zarathushtra®! had not® created®
this* Star® Tishtrya®”’ as® worthy of worship” as” worthy of praise”, as”
worthy of propitiation’, as’ worthy of glorification” as’ Myself’ - Ahura
Mazda”, in order to withstand” this*® Pairika®' (named) Duzyairya®’, whom®
wicked”! persons” call”, Huyairya”, in order to destroy® drive (her) out™,
and prevent*® her malice**, (54) then indeed” every® day” (and) every'”
night? (i.e. always) “that? pairika* (named) Duzyairya® would wage’? war"!
(or strife) here*® (i.e.) in the entire’ corporeal’ world’ of Mine*’, and “‘would
injure’? the life’? ““everywhere.

(55) Tishtry6o'® zi’? raévao'® khvarenanghao” avam” pairikam?!
adarezayeiti”, bibdaishcha”™, thribdaishcha™, avanemnaishcha” vispab-
daishcha”*, manayen ahe yatha”’ hazangrem” naram” dim*’ narem*!
adarezayoit”; yoi** hyan*™ asti* aojangha” aojishta’’.

(55) “But!” the radiant'® (and) glorious’? Tishtrya'® binds” that”? pairika”!
(named Duzyairya) with double® and treble fetters™, and with invincible”
“fetters*®. Explanation:- (How he binds the fetters is stated below.)

Just as’’ a thousand”® men’? who*® are** the strongest*’ in physical?
strength*® would fetter? one*® man*!; (the same way Tishtrya binds stoutly
that pairika so that she can be prevented from doing any harm).

(56) Yat zi’ Spitama*’ Zarathushtra”', airyao” danghavo*
Tishtryehe* raévato* khvarenanguhatd“ aiwi-sachyaresh” daitim*®
yasnemcha” vahmemcha™ yatha*! he® asti* daityOtem6o™ yasnascha®
wq Professors Spiegel and Harlez. Taking “khao” instead of “hao” according to Geldner would
“drain out the springs of water (khao)” (Darmesteter).

wr hisidhyat (potential mood) root sad = Sanskrit Shadh = to smite, to destroy; “sad” is changed
into “sid”; being an Intensive verb, the root is reduplicated.

ws Original meaning “near and roundabout” (acha pairicha); dvaraiti present participle locative
singular, original base dvarat; (root dvar = to run).

wt zi = Sanskrit hi = but, because, indeed, verily.

wu Root van = Winnan (Saxon) = to win, to conquer.


--- Page 186 ---

170 KHORDEH AVESTA

vahmascha™, ashat®’ hacha** yat® vahishtat®, noit® ithra? airyao™
danghavo™ frash® hyat® haéna%”, nodit® voighna”, ndit” pama” noit”
kapastish”, noit™” haényd” ratho”, noit” uzgerepto” drafsho”.

(56) O Spitaman* Zarathushtra*!'! If* the Iranian”? “Ycountries*® ““would
perform*’ verily® the proper** worship® and adoration™ in honour of the
radiant* (and) glorious® Star Tishtrya“ just as*' the most proper** worship*®
and adoration®* performed with the best® righteousness*’** is* (worthy) for
him” (i.e. Tishtrya), then neither®' the hostile army®’ nor calamity®,
neither” “sickness” nor ” vengeance”, neither the chariot” of the hostile
army” nor the uplifted” banner” (of the enemy) can rush forward®* to the
Iranian countries™.

(57) “Paiti dim peresat Zarathushtrod, kat zi asti; Ahura Mazda,
Tishtryehe raévatd khvarenanguhatd daityOtem6 yasnascha vahmascha,
ashat hacha yat vahishtat. (58) Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdao, zaothrao he
uzbarayen airyao danghavo, baresma he sterenayen airyao danghavo;
pasim he pachayen airyao danghavod; aurushem va vohu-gaonem va,
kachit va gaonanam ham6-gaonem.

(59) Ma he mairyO géeurvaydit, ma jahika, ma ash4vd asravayat-
gathd, ahumerekhsh, paityarend imam-datnam yam 4ahiirtm Zara-
thushtrim (60) Yezi-she mairyO géurvayat, jahika va, ashavoO va
asravayat-gathd, ahumerekhsh, paityarend imam daénam yam ahiirim
Zarathushtrim, para baéshaza hachaite Tishtryd raévao khvare-
nanguhao. (61) Hamatha airyabyO danghubyd voighnao jasaonti;
hamatha airyabyd danghibyd haéna frapataonti; hamatha airyabyo
danghubyd janydonte, panchasaghnai sataghnaishcha, sataghnai
hazangraghnaishcha, hazangraghnai baévareghnaishcha, baévareghnai
ahakhshtaghnaishcha.”’

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna Tishtrim
starem. zaothrabyod Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide. Haomayd gava baresmana, hizv0-danghangha, manthracha
vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshuhdhaeibyascha
vaghzibyo.

wv Le. People of the countries under the suzerainty of the Sovereigns of Iran.
ww Original meaning “give, offer” (Sanskrit root 4-shak).

wx The meaning of paman (Sanskrit paman) is skin-disease; scab (Darmesteter compares this
word with Afghan “‘pam” (leprosy) and “pam-an” (a leper). In Behram yasht Dr. Geldner has
taken the same word “pama”’.

wy For comparison, see Behram yasht, para 48. For the translation of paras 57-61, see Behram
yasht, karda XVII, paras 49-53. The difference is, in this yasht the name of Tir, and in the other
yasht the name of Behram occurs.

wz For the translation of paragraphs 57-61, see Beheram yasht, paragraphs 49-53.


--- Page 187 ---

TIR YASHT 171

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud) Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami, Tishtryehe
stard raévatO khvarenanguhatd- satavaésahe frapahe  siirahe
Mazdadhatahe. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, taroidfte angrahe mainyeush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashOtemem. Staomi Ashem; Ashem Vohi 1. Gorje khoreh awazayad
Teshtar Tir rayOmand khorehmand berasad améavand_ pirozgar
amavandih pirozgarl. Dad din beh Mazdayasnan, agahi ravai
goafarangani bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man 4no Avayad
shudan, man ano Avayad shudan, man 4no Aavayad shudan. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite facing South) dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarathushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Siira Anahite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nemo urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate. Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.
Tishtrim starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem yazamaide. Ashem
Vohi 1. Teshtar Tir rayOmand khorehmand berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

GOSH YASHT
“Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdan Ahura Mazda khodae awazini gorje khoreh
awazayad; Géush urva Dravaspa sirahe khoreh berasad.””

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa getiI manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani geti mmdani, okhe avakhsh pashem4an pa sé gavashni pa patet
xa This yasht is also known by the name “Dravaspa yasht”. As regards the explanation of
“Dravaspa”, see the last note of paragraph | of this yasht.

xb i.e. May the powerful and glorious Goshuruna Dravaspa come (unto my help)! For its ex-
planation, see the last note of paragraph 1 of this yasht.


--- Page 188 ---

172 KHORDEH AVESTA

hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazd4o, tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi Ashem Vohi 3.

Fravarané mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Dravaspayao siirayao
Mazdadhatayao ashaonyao,“ khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmiaicha
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota fra-me mrite,
atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti.

(Kardah 1) (1) Dravaspim! siram? Mazdadhatam’ ashaonim‘
yazamaide*; drvd-pasvam’, drv6-staoram’, drvd-urvatham’, drv6-apere-
nayukam? pouru-spakhshtim! diurat!§= pathana? khvathravana™
dareghd-hakhedhrayana"™.

(1) We worship*® the powerful? (and) holy* ““Dravaspa', possessed of
long-standing friendship'* created by Ahura Mazda’, giving health to cattle®,

or drought animals’, to “friends*, and children’, keeping watchfully’® from

afar'', giving happiness!’ widely'’.“"

(2) Yukhta aspam* vareté-ratham", khvanat-chakhram’’, fshao-
nim’, marezam”, amavaitim”’, huraodham”!, khvasaokam” baéshaz-
yam” drvo-staitim™, drvod-varetam” avanghe” naram”’ ashaonam”.

(2) (We worship Dravaspa) who yokes teams of horses!*, keeps the fast-
moving chariot!®, with resounding (or shining) wheels’’, prosperity-giving',
pure’’, powerful”, beautiful*', conferring benefit on one’s self”, healing”,

“standing firm™, giving powerful support? for the help”® of the righteous”

men’,

xc i.e. For the worship, etc., of the powerful and holy Dravaspa created by Ahura Mazda (see
Khorshed Nyayesh).

xd The original meaning of drvaspa (= drva + aspa) is “giving health to the horse”, hence the
yazata giving health to all the animals; as his collaborator there occurs “Géush urvan”, the
meaning of which is the soul of the cattle, source, the “soul of the universe”. Moreover, the
yazata Dravaspa is in the feminine gender like Avan, Din, Ashishvangh. Dr. Haug from the last
part of this paragraph compares “Dravaspa” with the Milky-way, thus: with many eyes (pouru-
spakhshtim); with distant roads (durat pathana), self-shining (khvathravana) and with long con-
stellation or with the cluster of stars (daregh6-hakhedh-rayana).

xe If we derive the word “urvatham” from the Sanskrit root vardh = to grow, then the meaning
of “drv6 urvatham” having followed by “r’ and preceded by the redundant “u” becomes
“urvadh” = urvath.

xf Or guarding fully from afar the roads, with comfortable, long-standing friendship. If we take
this word “pouru-spakhshti” instead of “pouru-spakhshttm” according to Geldner’s text and the
last three words in the instrumental singular, then it can be translated as:- We worship Dravaspa
giving health to children, who guards fully'® from afar” with wide'’, long-standing friendship *

accompanied by happiness”’. Original meaning is “with full watch”.
xg Here “yazamaide” occurring in the first para is to be employed.

xh From “drv6-staiti” the Persian word “dorosta” (sound) is derived


--- Page 189 ---

GOSH YASHT 173

(3) “Tam”? yazata*® Haoshyanghd* Paradhatd” upa* upabde*
Harayao* Berezo** Srirayao*’ Mazdadhatayao*, satem* aspanam*”
hazangrem*! gavam”, baévare* anumayanam“ uta* zaothram*
frabard“’.

(3) Also*® the bearer*’ of libations*® (King) Haoshyangha*! of the
Pishdadian (Dynasty) worshipped* her” (i.e. Dravaspa) near*’ the foot* of
the beautiful*’” Mount Alborz***°, created by Ahura Mazda*, with a hundred’?
horses**!, a thousand*! “oxen” (and) ten thousand* small “animals** (and
prayed for the boon).

(4) Dazdi*® me” vanguhi* sévishte*! Dravaspe™, tat ayaptem™, yat®>
bavani® aiwi-vanyao*’ vispe*® daéva® mazainya®, yatha®' azem® noit®
tarshto™ franemane® thvaéshat® pard”’ daévatibyo®, fra ahmat® paro”
vispe”’ daéva” anuso” tarshta’ nemaonte™, tarshta” temanghod”
dvaraonte”.

(4) O good® and most beneficent®' Dravaspa™! grant thou** unto me”

this? boon* that I may overcome***’ all’* the daevas* of Mazandaran,
also” that I? (am) never® striken with terror“, bow down® through fear®
before” the daevas®, (but) on the contrary®” all’! the daevas” striken with
terror’ bow down” (before me) against their will’? (and) terror-striken” run
away” into darkness”.

(5) Dathat’ ahmai” tat®® avat*! dyaptem® drvaspa®  sira*
Mazdadhata** ashaoni* thrathri®’ zaothrd-barai® aredhrai® yazemnai”
jaidhyantai’', dathrish” ayaptem”.

(5) The heroic’, holy*® Dravaspa*? created by Ahura Mazda*, the
nourishing (and) the bestower” of boons® granted” (the boon mentioned in
the fourth paragraph above) to that” bearer of libations®’, the dedicator®, the
worshipper” a and the beseecher®’ (i.e. to the King Hoshang of the
Pishdadian Dynasty).

(6) Ahe™ raya °* khvarenanghacha”, tam*’ yazai’® surunvata”
yasna™, tam' yazai? huyashta> yasna‘, Dravaspam* siram’®
Mazdadhatam’ ashaonim*’, zaothrabyo® Dravaspam'’  suram"
Mazdadhatam” ashaonim"’ yazamaide".

Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha vacha-
cha syaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

xi Except the last three words this para occurs in Avan yasht, para 21.

xj In the literal sense these are translated as: “a hundred of horses, a thousand oxen and ten thou-
sand small animals”.

xk The final portion of this paragraph occurs in the seventh karda of the Srosh yasht Vadi.


--- Page 190 ---

174 KHORDEH AVESTA

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(6) On account of her™ (i.e. Dravaspa’s) splendour” and glory” her®’ do I
worship”® with the famous” yasna'” (and) do I worship her (i.e.) the heroic®
and holy® Dravaspa* created by Ahura Mazda’ with the well-consecrated?
yasna*. We worship" the heroic’! (and) holy'® Dravaspa’® created by Ahura
Mazda” with libations’.

(Kardah 2) (7) “Dravaspim siram Mazdadhatam ashaonim
yazamaide; drvd-pasvam, drvo-staoram, drv0-urvatham drvo-apere-
nayukam, pouru-spakhshtim dirat, pathana khvathravana daregho-
hakhedhrayana. Yukhta-aspam, varetd-ratham, khvanat-chakhram,
fshaonim, marez4m, amavaitim huraodham, khvasaokam, baéshazyam,
drvo-staitim, drvo-varetam avanghe naram ashaonam.

(8) Tam! yazata’? yo? yimod* khshaéto® hvathwo° Hukairyat’ hacha®
berezanghat’, satem’® aspanam" hazangrem” gavam'> baévare'™ anu-
mayanam'", uta’ zaothram” frabaro".

(8) Jamshed* the King®, bearer'® of the libations'’ and the protector of the
subjects also'® worshipped’ her (i.e. Dravaspa) from® the Mount’? Hukara’
with hundred'® horses''! thousand’? oxen’? (and) ten thousand'* small
animals'* (and asked for the boon):

(9) ““Dazdi’’ me”? vanguhi”! sévishte”, Dravaspe* tat™* ayaptem”,
yatha” azem”’ fshaoni”* vathwa”, avabarani* avi’! Mazdao” damabyo™,
yatha* azem* amerekhtim”, avabarani*’ avi*® Mazdao” damabyo”.

(9) O good?! (and) most beneficent*? Dravaspa**! do thou grant’? me”
this** boon” that I may bring*’ prosperity’ unto*! the creatures* of Ahura
Mazda* (and) “the increase of cattle’? “‘and immortality*® unto** the
creatures” of Ahura Mazda*’.

(10) “Uta azem® apa-barani®, va“ shudhemcha* tarshnemcha“

hacha*’ Mazdao* damabyod”, uta™ azem* apa-barani’, va® zaurvam-
cha™, merethyimcha® hacha® mazdio” damabyd™, uta” azem™ apa-
barani®’', va” gerememcha® vatem™ aotemcha® hacha® Mazdio0”
damabyod", hazangrem® aiwi-gamanam”.

(10) Also*! I” may take away® (or remove) both** hunger* and thirst“
from*’ the creatures” of Ahura Mazda‘; Also I may take away”

xl For its translation, see paragraphs First and second of this yasht.
xm Dr. Geldner takes this paragraph in the verse form of six lines.

xn I have taken the words “fshaoni vathwa” as nouns in the Dvandva Compound. Also the word
“fshaoni” occurs as an adjective, meaning prosperous, “fat”.

xo For comparison, see Avan yasht para 26 where the King Jamshed prays for destroying the
power and the prosperity of the daevas.

xp Dr. Geldner takes this paragraph in the verse form of 10 lines.


--- Page 191 ---

GOSH YASHT 175

decrepitude™ and death*’ from*® the creatures** of Ahura Mazda*’; I® may
(cast out) from® the creatures® of Ahura Mazda®’ the hot® and the cold®
wind”.

(11) Dathat ahmai tat avat ayaptem Dravaspa siira Mazdadhata
ashaoni thrathri, zaothr6-barai aredhrai yazemnai jaidhyantai, dathrish
“lAyaptem.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tam yazai surunvata yasna, tam yazai
huyashta yasna, Dravaspam siram Mazdadhatam ashaonim. zaothra-
byd Dravaspam siram Mazdadhatam ashaoniIm yazamaide. Haomayd
gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaoth-
nacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhatibyascha vaghziby6.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah 3) (12) Dravaspam surdam Mazdadhatéam ashaonim
yazamaide; drv6-pasvam, drvo-staoram, drv0-urvatham, drv0-apere-
nayukam, pouru-spakhshtim dirat, pathana khvathravana daregho-
hakhedhrayana, yukhta-aspam, varetd-ratham, khvanat-chakhram,
fshaonim, merezim, amavaitim, huraodham khvasaokam,
baéshazayam, drvo-staitim, drv6-varetam avanghe naram “ashaonam.

(13) Tam! yazata? Viso? puthro* Athwyandish’, viso° sirayao’ Thraé-
taond’, upa’? varenem’’ chathru-gaoshem", satem’? aspanam" hazang-
rem gavam'* baévare’’ anumayanam”, uta'® zaothrao” frabaro”.

(13) Thraetaona, the son* of Athwya? family’ of the valiant’ race® who is
the bearer of libations, worshipped’ her! (i.e. Dravaspa) in the *“four-
cormnered'’ Varena-Gilan)'°, city with hundred’ horses'*, thousand’? oxen'*
and ten thousand’® small animals!’ (and prayed for the boon as).

(14) Dazdi?' me” vanguhi”® sévishte*4 Dravaspe” tat”* A4yaptem”’, yat?®
bavani” aiwi-vanyao” azim*' Dahakem® thri-zafanem*, thri-kamere-
dhem*™, khshvash-ashim*, hazangra-yaokhshtim*, ash-aojanghem”’,
daévim*® drujem®”, aghem* gaéthavy6"' drvantem”, yam*® ashaojas-
temam* drujem* fracha kerentat* angrd mainyush” avi yam”
astvaitim™ gaétham*, mahrkai” ashahe® gaéthanam™. Uta*® he** vanta*’
azani® Savanghavachi® arenavachi®, yoi*' hen® kehrpa® sraéshta™
zazatée® gaéthyaicha®, yoi”’ abddteme®.

(14) O good?’ (and) most beneficent* Dravaspa”*! grant me thou”! this”

xq i.e. Dravaspa yazata granted the boon asked by the King Jamshed; For its translation see
paras 5-6 of this yasht.

xr For its translation, see paragraphs First and second of this yasht.

xs Or of four parts or four-gated; see Vendidad fargard 1.18.


--- Page 192 ---

176 KHORDEH AVESTA

boon?’ that”? I may overcome*’ (subdue) the Azi-Dahak*!*’, three-jawed*,
three-skulled™, six-orbed*, of a thousand wiles**, very strong*’ devilish*®
Druj*”, who is harmful*°, wicked” for (these) countries*’. Whom* Angra
Mainyu“ created*’ as by far the strongest’ Druj* on** (this) material>°
world>! for the destruction” of the worlds™ of righteousness*. Moreover® I
“may release (or give salvation®*’) to his** two wives*’ Shehernaz® and
“Aranvaz™ who*! are” the fairest™ of the bodies* amongst the women® of
(this) world®, (and) who” (are fallen) in the deepest cavern®.

(15) Dathat ahmiai tat avat a4ayaptem Dravaspa Sira Mazdadhata
ashaoni thrathri, zaothr0-barai aredhrai yazemnai jaidhyantai, dathris
ayaptem.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tam yazai surunvata yasna, tam yazai
huyashta yasna, Dravaspam siram Mazdadhatam  ashaonim.
zaothrabyd Dravaspam siram Mazdadhatam ashaoniIm “yazamaide.

Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvd-danghangha, manthracha vacha-
cha shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhatibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah 4) (16) Dravaspam siram Mazdadhatém ashaonim
yazamaide; drv6-pasvam, drvo-staoram, drv0-urvatham, drv0-apere-
nayukam, pouru-spakhshtim dirat, pathana khvathravana daregho-
hakhedhrayana, yukhta-aspam, varetd-ratham, khvanat-chakhram,
fshaonim, marezam, amavaitim, huraodham, khva-saokam, baéshaza-
yam, drvo0-staitim, drv6-varetam avanghe naram ““ashaonam.

(17) Tam! yazata? Haom6’ Frashmish‘* baéshazyo‘, srir6°, khshath-
ry0’, zairi-doithro*’, barezishte’ paiti'? barezahi'' Hairaithyo” paiti'
Barezayao'; dat’ him" jaidhyat” avat!® ayaptem”.

(17) Haoma’*, the prosperity-bringer*, the healing®, the beautiful’, the
royal’ (and) golden-eyed®, worshipped’ her' (i.e. Dravaspa) upon'' the
highest’ height!! of (the Mount) Alborz'?'*, and asked of'” her'* this'* boon’®;

(18) Dazdi” me?! vanguhi” sévishte*® Dravaspe™ tat?> ayaptem”®,
yatha”’ azem” bandayeni” mairim®” Tuirim*' Frangrasyanem™”, uta®

xt For comparison of paras 13-14, see Avan yasht, paras 33-34.

xu Shehernaz and Aranavaz were both most beautiful and handsome Iranian ladies. In the
Shahnama they are said to be the sisters of King Jamshed. Professor Mohl and Professor
Darmesteter have regarded them as the daughters of King Jamshed.

xv i.e. Dravaspa yazata granted the boon asked for by King Faredoon. For its translation, see
paras 5-6 of this same yasht.

xw For its translation, see para first and second of this yasht.


--- Page 193 ---

GOSH YASHT 177

bastem™ vadhayeni*, uta** bastem*’ upanayeni*® bastem® Kavoish”
Haosravanghahe", janat” tem*? Kava Haosrava“, pasne* varodish*
Chaéchistahe*”’ jafrahe** urvyapahe”, puthro™” kaéna*! syavarshanai™
zur6-jatahe*’, narahe™, Aghraérathahecha® Naravahe™.

(18) O good” (and) most beneficent® Dravaspa™! do thou grant”? me?!
this? boon”, that?’ ?’% may bind” the murderous*’ (or cruel) Turanian
Afrasyab”, and*? may drag* (him) bound*, and*° bring*® him before (the
King) Kaikhousrou*“', (so that) he may kill” him* (i.e. Afrasyab) on the
other side* of the lake**, Chaechasta*’, broad-watered” and deep**.™

Explanation:- (As to why he kills him a note is given below.)

The son” (ie. Kaikhousrou) (may kill Afrasyab) in revenge™ of
Syavakhsh” killed by violence* and in revenge®! of the hero™ Aghraeras® of
*YNaru race®®.

(19) Dathat ahmai tat avat a4ayaptem Dravaspa Sura Mazdadhata
ashaoni thrathri, zaothr6-barai aredhrai yazemnai jaidhyantai, dathrish
ayaptem. Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tam yazai surunvata yasna, tam
yazai huyashta yasna, Dravaspam siram Mazdadhataéam ashaonim.
zaothrabyd Dravaspam suram Mazdadhatam ashaonim “yazamaide.
Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvo-danghangha, manthracha vachacha
shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhatibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah 5) (20) Dravaspam suram Mazdadhatém ashaonim
yazamaide; drv0-pasvam, drvo-staoram, drvd-urvatham, drvd-aperena-
yukam, pouru-spakhshtim dirat, pathana khvathravana dareghd-
hakhedhrayana. Yukhta-aspam, varetd-ratham, khvanat-chakhram,
fshaonim; marezam, amavaitim, huraodham, khvasaokam, baéshazy4m,
drvo-staitim, drv0-varetam avanghe naram “ashaonam.

(21) Tam! yazata’ arsha’ airyanam* dakhyunam* khshathrai* han-
kerem6’ Haosrava’, pasne’ vardish’® Chaéchistahe" jafrahe’ urvya-

xx This fact agrees to a greater extent with the matter occurring in the Shahnamaa. It is written
there that when a saintly man, Haoma was offering prayer on the mountain, having seen
Afrasyab hidden there, carried him bound to King Kaikhousrou.

xy Although Aghareras was of Turanian descent and brother of Afrasyab, yet he himself being
virtuous and just, and having his regards for the Iranians saved the lives of many Iranians from
dangers; hence Afrasyab killed him.

xz 1.e. Dravaspa yazata granted the boon asked for by Haoma. For its translation, see paras 5-6
of this yasht.

ya For its translation see first and second paragraphs of this yasht.


--- Page 194 ---

178 KHORDEH AVESTA

pahe, satem' aspanam', hazangrem! gavam!’, baévare'’, *"anumaya-
nam” uta” zaothram”! frabaro”.

(21) The bearer” of libations’ the manly? (King) Kaikhosrou®, **the
consolidator’ of the Kingdom® of Iranian* countries’, also worshipped’ her!
(i.e. Dravaspa) with hundred’ horses'*, thousand’® oxen'? (and) ten
thousand’* small animals’? on the other side’ of the lake’? Chaechasta"’, (and)
broad-watered’ and deep”.

(22) *“Dazdi?-me™* vanguhi?* sevishte, Dravaspe”’ tat”? ayaptem”
yatha™® azem?! nijanani?? mairtim® Tairim*‘ Frahgrasyanem* pasne-*
vardish*’ Chaéchistahe* jafrahe® urvayapahe”, puthrd‘’ kaéna”
Syavarshanai®, zurd-jatahe* narahe“, aghraérathahecha® naravahe"’.

(22) O good* (and) most beneficent”® Dravaspa*”! grant me thou’? this”
boon” that*® I may kill** the murderous* Turanian** Afrasyab*> on the other
side* of the lake*’ Chaechasta*’, broad-watered“ **and deep*”

Explanation:- (As to the matter why I kill him is stated below.)

(I who am) the “son*! (of Syavakhsh) may kill that murderous Afrasyab
in revenge” of Syavakhsh* killed by violence“ (and) in revenge” of hero*
Aghreras*® of Naru race*’.

(23) Dathat ahmai tat avat ayaptem Dravaspa sira Mazdadhata
ashaoni thrathri, zaothr6-barai aredhrai yazemnai jaidhyantai, dathrish
ayaptem.”*

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tam yazai surunvata yasna, tam yazai
huyashta yasna, Dravaspim siram Mazdadhatam  ashaonim.
zaothrabyd Dravaspam siram Mazdadhatam ashaonim yazamaide.
Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvo-danghangha, manthracha vachacha
shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhatibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah 6) (24) Dravaspam siiram Mazdadhatam ashonim
yazamaide; drvd-pasvam, drvd-staoram, drvo-urvathim, drvo-
aperenayukaiam, pouru-spakhshtim dirat, pathana, khvathravana

yb Except the last three words this para occurs in para 49 of Avan yasht.

yc i.e. the merger of all countries under the control of Iran into one sovereignty.
yd Dr. Geldner takes this paragraph into verse form of 9 lines.

ye Darmesteter translates “urvyapa, uruyapa” by “of salt waters”.

yf For the explanation of this paragraph, see Karda 4 of this yasht.

yg i.e. Dravaspa yazata granted the boon asked by King Kaikhousrou. For its translation, see
paras 5-6 of this yasht.


--- Page 195 ---

GOSH YASHT 179

dareghd-hakhedhrayana. Yukhta-aspam, varetd-ratham, khvanat-
chakhram, fshaonim, marezim, amavaitim, huraodham, khvasaokam,
baéshazyam, drvo-staitim, drvo-varetam avanghe naram ""ashaonam.

(25) Tam! yazata’ yo> ashava‘ Zarathushtro*, Airyene®’ Vaéjahi’
vanghuyao® Daityayao? “Haoma!® yo! gava’ baresmana! hizvo-
danghangha™, manthracha’ vachacha!’® shyaothnacha!” zaothra-
byascha’® arshukhdhaéibyascha” vaghzibyo”; dat”! him” jaidhyat™®
avat™ ayaptem”.

(25) (Prophet) Holy* Zarathushtra* worshipped? her! (i.e. Dravaspa) in the
Airyan Vaeja®’ (on the banks) of the River Veh Daitya*® with Haoma'®
mixed with the milk!’ (and) Baresman"’, and with the wisdom of the tongue"
coupled with thought'*, word'® and deed’’ and with truthful!? utterances”® for
libations'®; and asked of” her” this4 boon”.

(26) “Dazdi?® me” vanguhi” sévishte”, Dravaspe* tat*! ayaptem”,
yatha® azem™ hachayene*, vanguhim® 4zatam*’ Hutaosim*™, anu-
matée® daéayao” anukhtée*’ daénayao”, anvarshtée* daénayao“, ya*
me” daénam‘” Mazdayasnim*, zarascha®” dat® apaécha*' aotat® ya*
me*™ varezanai*® vanguhim” dat*’ frasastim*®.

(26) O good” (and) most beneficent” Dravaspa**! do thou grant’? me”’
this boon” that**1 may lead * the good** (and) nobly born*” “Hutaosa*® to
think?? speak*’ and act* in conformity with® the Religion“. (And) (who)**
(i.e. Hutaosa) “may set*(her) heart? upon my*’ Mazda-worshipping®
Religion’ (and) *"may make known™ her “wish*!; besides she may (i.e.
Hutaosa) *°'admonish™®* me™ for (my prophetic) work.

(27) Dathat ahmai tat avat ayaptem Dravaspa sira Mazdadhata
ashaoni thrathri, zaothr6-barai aredhrai yazemnai jaidhyantai, dathrish
ayaptem. Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tam yazai surunvata yasna, tam
yazai huyashta yasna, Dravaspam siram Mazdadhataéam ashaonim.
zaothrabyd Dravaspam siram Mazdadhatéam ashaonim *?yazamaide.

yh For its translation, see first and second paragraphs of this yasht.

yi Here Dr. Geldner has adopted the reading “haomay6”, but it is not correct.

yj Dr. Geldner takes this para in verse-form of 10 lines; each line ends with comma (,).
yk Hutaosa is the wife of King Gushtasp. In the Shah Nama she is called “Ketayun”.

yl Or may keep love-sympathy upon my religion; in para 105 of Avan yasht, Prophet
Zarathushtra prays for the boon that he may attract the King Gushtasp to his Religion and may
keep sufficient faith on that religion.

ym Apaécha - root up = Sanskrit ap = to wish, to desire.
yn “Aotat” - root vat = Sanskrit vad = to speak, to announce; imperfect subjunctive.

yo Or he may give” good” renown™ to my™ (prophetic) work. For comparison, see stanza 7 of
yasna Ha 49.

yp i.e. Dravaspa yazata granted the boon asked by the Prophet Zarathushtra. For its translation,


--- Page 196 ---

180 KHORDEH AVESTA

Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvo-danghangha, manthracha vachacha
shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhatibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah 7) (28) Dravaspam siram Mazdadhatéam ashaonim
yazamaide; drvd-aspam, drv0-staoram, drvd-urvatham, drvo-apere-
nayukam, pouru-spakhshtim dirat, pathana khvathravana dareghd
hakhedhrayana. Yukhta-aspam varetd-ratham, khvanat-chakhram,
fshaonim, marezam, amavaitim, huraodham, khvasaokam, baéshazyam,
drvo-staitim, drv0-varetam avanghe naram “‘ashaonam.

(29) Tam! yazata? berezaidhish? Kava‘ Vishtaspd° pasne® apd’
Daityaydo’, satem’ aspanam", hazangrem" gavam”, baévare’ anuma-
yanam", uta’ zaothram"* frabaro”.

(29) The bearer'’ of libations'® Kay* Vishtaspa* of exalted “vision? also’*
worshipped’ her! (i.e. Dravaspa) on the other side’ of the river’ Veh-Daitya®
with hundred’ horses'®, thousand'’ oxen’? (and) ten thousand’? small
animals'*, (and asked for the boon;).

(30) Dazdi'® me” vanguhi” sévishte?! Dravaspe” tat ayaptem™
yatha®> azani”* peshane”’ ashta® aurvantd”, vispa-thaurvo-astoish*',
puthr6” vispa®-thaurvo*, urvi*-khaodh6”*, urvi*’-varethro**, stvr’-
manothrish”, yenghe*! hapta®” sata* ushtranam“ jainyavarat*, pascha“
khvidhahe*’ yatha* azani? peshane”’ mairyehe*! Khyaonahe” Arejat-
aspahe™, yatha™ azani*® peshane” darshinikahe*’ daévayasnahe®.

O good” (and) most beneficent”! Dravaspa™! do thou grant'® me’’ this”
boon” that” I may drive away the eight”* warriors” in the battle:- (1) Vispa-
thaurvo-asti**!, (2) the son” of Vispa-thaurva®***, (3) Urvi-khaodha***°, (4)
Urvi-verethra*”**, (5) Stvi-manothri*“°, whose*! seven” hundred* camels“

follow* “him; I may drive him away” in battle*°, (6) the “excited*” (and)

see paras 5-6 of this yasht.
yq For its translation, see first and second paras of this yasht.

yr i.e. Liberal-hearted; or far-sighted, far-seeing, noble. “Of noble lineage” (Harlez). “tall”
(Darmesteter).

ys Professor Harlez.

yt Root khvidh = Sanskrit svid = to perspire, to sweat, to excite. This passage is rather obscure. I
do not regard this translation quite satisfactory. European scholars having taken “ashta-
aurvanta” as proper name have considered urvi-khaodho, urvi-varethra, stvi-manothri as epithets
and have translated them as “having a projecting helmet”, having a projected shield and of thick
neck or of big head. It is true that these words have these meanings. Prof. Darmesteter translates
as follows:- “O Dravaspa! grant me this boon that I may put to flight Ashta-aurvant, the son of
Vispa-thaurvo-asti, the all-afflicting, .... and the attacks of those seven hundred camels with
plundered goods behind him”.


--- Page 197 ---

GOSH YASHT 181

murderous’! Khyaona™ (as well as) (7) Arjaspa™’; also™* I may drive away*®
(8) the idol-worshipper*® Darshinika*”’.

(31) Uta® azem® nyanani® Tathravantem® duz-daénem™, uta®
azem® nijanani®’ Spinjaurushkem® daévayasnem®, uta” azem”! frao-
urvaésayeni” Humaya™ Varedhakanamcha™, Khvyaonyehecha”™ dang-
havo’, uta” azem”™ nijanani” Khvyaoninam® dakhyunam*', pancha-
saghnai” sataghnaishcha*®, sataghnai* hazanghraghnaishcha®, ha-
zanghraghnai*® baévareghnaishcha*®” baévareghnai*® ahakhshtagh-
naishcha®.

(31) I*' may smite” also Tathravant® of the wicked faith“ and the daeva-
worshipper® Spinjaurushka®; and” may introduce” good laws” (or wise
code of laws”) into the countries’ of Varedhaka™ and of “Khvyaonya”™.
Moreover”, I> may ’smite” (the people) of the Khvyaonian® countries*',
fifties** and hundreds*, hundreds** and thousands®, thousands® and ten
thousands times®’ ten thousands* and innumerable®.

(32) Dathat ahmai tat avat ayaptem Dravaspa sira Mazdadhata
ashaoni thrathri, zaothr6-barai aredhrai yazemnai jaidhyantai, dathrish
ayaptem. Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tam yazai surunvata yasna, tam
yazai huyashta yasna, Dravaspam suram Mazdadhataéam ashaonim.
zaothrabyd Dravaspam siram Mazdadhatam ashaonim “yazamaide.
Haomayd gava baresmana, hizvo-danghangha, manthracha vachacha
shyaothnacha, zaothrabyascha arshukhdhatibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud) Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha afrinami, Dravaspayao
Sirayao Mazdadhatay4o “ashaonyao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh

yu Prof. Darmesteter gives some explanation about this:- The Khvyaonas seem to have been the
Chionitae, a bellicose tribe near the land of Gilan, often at war with the first Sassanides.

yv The name of the Varedhakas reminds one of the Vertae who are mentioned once in company
with the Chionitae; but their geographical situation is not ascertained. In any case the proximity
of the Daitya shows that both the people must have inhabited the Western Coast of the Caspian
Sea.

yw i.e. Dravaspa yazata granted the boon asked by the King Gushtasp. This Seventh Kardah ex-
cept slight difference corresponds to the 9" Kardah of Arshisvangh yasht.

yx For its translation, see paras 5-6 of this yasht.


--- Page 198 ---

182 KHORDEH AVESTA

Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyeush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje Khoreh awazayad Géush Urva Dravaspa sirahe khoreh
berasdd amavand pirozgar amavandth pirozgari. Dad din beh
Mazdayasnan, agahi ravai goafrangani bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin
bad. Man 4no Avayad shudan, man 4no Avayad shudan, man 4no Aavayad
shudan. Ashaone Ashem Vohii 1.

(Facing the South, recite) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarthushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sira Anahite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

Dravaspam suram Mazdadhatam ashaoniIm yazamaide. Ashem Vohi
1. Geush urva Dravaspa surahe khoreh berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

SROSH YASHT HADOKHT
¥Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdan Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini gorje khoreh
awazayad; Sarosh asho, tagi, tan-farman, shekafta-zin, zin-avzar, salare
damane Ahura Mazda berasad. Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az
harvastin dushmata duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem
goft, oem kard, oem jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni
gavashni kunashni, tani ravani getl mindani, okhe avakhsh pasheman
pa sé gavashni pa patet hom.

Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohii
3. Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Sraoshahe ashyehe,
takhmahe, tanu-manthrahe, darshi-draosh, Aahuiryehe, khshnaothra
yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi
VairyOd zaota fra-me mrite, atha ratush ashatchithacha fra ashava
vidhvao **mraoti.

(Kardah 1) (1) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem’ verethrajanem‘
fradat-gaéthem’ ashavanem?’ ashahe’ ratiim® yazamaide’. Nem6" vohi",
nemo” vahishtem’, Zarathushtra™, gaéthabyo%. (2) Tat'® dravato”

yy i.e. Srosh yasht given in the twentieth Nask called Hadokht

yz For the translation and explanation, see Srosh Baz, above.


--- Page 199 ---

SROSH YASHT HADOKHT 183

drvatam'’® urvatd” paiti-dareshta”; tat?! dravatd” dravaityaoscha*
ashi“, ushi?> karena”, gava?’, dvarethra”, jafare derezvan*’ pairi-
urvaeshtem*'. Yat? nemo* vohi™ adhavim* atbaéshem”* naire*’ ham-
varetish*’, drujo*’ varethma” dareshta“'.

(1) We praise’ the holy® Srosh! beautiful’, victorious‘, bringing-prosperity
to the world’ (and) righteous’, (who is) the lord® of righteousness’. O
Zarathushtra'*! prayer'® (is) good"' for the people of the world’ (i.e. for the
benefit of the people of the world), it (is) best'’.

Explanation:- (The reason of the fact that prayer is most excellent is
mentioned below).

(2) It’ (i.e. the prayer) (is) a shield”® against the powerful’? and wicked'’
that?! (prayer) (is) covering all around*! the eyes”, intelligence’ (and) the
ears” of the wicked male” and female* (and) acts as a fetter*® for (their)
hands’’, feet*® (and) mouths”. The prayer®*® which” is perfect**, performed
with the conscience and “far away from wicked intention® (is) a protection®’,
a shield“ against the druj*’, (and) the repeller (of that druj).

Explanation:- (The prayer performed with sincere heart and pure
intention serves for us a very powerful weapon against the wicked, and
against superstitious and frightful thoughts. True prayer produces in us a sort
of heroism and thereby we become powerful to prevent, to a great extent,
hardships arisen against us. When all the daevas and drujas came to kill the
Holy Zarathushtra, with an evil intent, the greatest remedy which was
applied by the Holy Prophet at the time was to recite and chant aloud the
efficacious hymn, “Yatha Ahi Vairyo”).

(3) Sraosh6! ashyd? drighiim’ thratdtem6‘; ho* verethraja® drujem’
jaghnishto*®. Na? ashava" afrivachastem6", ho’ verethra’ verethravas-
temod'*. Manthro'’ Spento'’ mainyavim” drujem"® nizbairishto”. Ahund
Vairyo” vacham verethrajastem6”. Arshukhdh6”* vakhsh™ yahi* vere-
thrajastem6”. Daéna”’ Mazdayasnish*® vispaéshu” vanghushu*’ vis-
paéshu*! asho-chithraéshu’, haithyadatem*  atha“  datem*
Zarathushtri*.

(3) The holy Srosh (yazata)’ (is) the nourisher* of the poor’, and (is)
victorious® smiting® the druj’; He’? (who) is the most righteous!? man’?
pronouncing words of blessing!’ (or the Holy'® Spell'*) (is) driving away the
most'® the invisible!’ *druj'’. Amongst (all) prayers?! (the prayer called)

za Original meaning is “Benevolent” and not “malevolent” or away from prejudices.

zb If the druj has entered into the mind of someone, i.e. if restlessness of mind or calamity of
heart has occurred, it is removed by means of the recitation of “Manthra Spenta”; “Manthra
Spenta” is, as it were, a good weapon of driving away the thought of ghost, witches, magic, etc.,
from the body. For further details, see Ardibehesht yasht, pars. 6-7.


--- Page 200 ---

184 KHORDEH AVESTA

Ahunavar” (is) the most victorious” ”(very efficacious) word” (i.e. the

Hymn of Ahuna Vairya). The Religion’’ of Mazda-worship” as well as** the
Law* of Zarathushtra*® in all”? good things*®, and in all*' things containing
the seed of righteousness™ (is) supporting the most* righteousness-truth.

(4) Yascha', Zarathushtra’, imat? ukhdhem‘ vach6> fravaochat®, na’
va® nairi? va’, asha-sara!! manangha”, asha-sara’? vachangha"™, asha-
sara’ shyaothna’; maso" va'* apo" maso” va?! thwaésho” khshapo”
va" tathryayao* aipi-dvanarayao”, apam”’ va’* navayanam” paiti*’
peretish*!, patham® va* paiti** vicharanao*, naram** va*’ ashaonam*”*
hanjamanaish”, drvatam“” va*' daévayasnanam™ handhvaranaish*, (5)
kahmi_ kahmichit va‘ aipyanam*, kahmi kahmichit” va*
arathyanim” thwaésho~ bivivao™'; noit* dim** yava™ anghe® ayan*,
noit” anghao*® khshapd”, dravao zaretd™ zaranumand” zazarand®,
ashibya®™ ava-spashtichina® avi ava-spashnaot”; noit® gadhahe® vazo-
vanthvyehe” tbaésho” frashtichina” frashnuyat”™.

(4) O Zarathushtra*! Whoso ever', a man’ or’ a woman’ should
pronounce’ this? hymn’ of prayer‘ (i.e. Ahunavar) with holy thought’, word'*
(and) extremely holy'* deed’®.

Explanation:- (On what occasion should he recite is stated below).

Either'® on high!” waters’? or! in great”? fear” (or “in terror”) or’ in the
dark*> night? overcast with mist”’, on*® the bridge*’ of canal (or river)”
waters’’, over** the zigzag paths* of the roads”, or’’ in the assemblies* of
the holy*® men*’, or’ in the “gatherings of wicked persons“, demon
worshippers”, (5) or at any*’ (calamity), at any (bad period),” if anyone
(would have fallen) into dangers” (or get) terrified*', (and if he would recite
Ahunavar with true faith), on that*> day” (or) on that®® night” (i.e. at the time
when he recites) (any) wicked®, oppressor®', tormentor® (or) doer of injury®

zc If we take the word yahi as locative singular of yah instead of taking as an adjective nominat-
ive singular of yahin, its meaning can be “in the work”, “in the enterprise”. Taking in this sense,
the translation of the sentence is (That) truthful word (i.e. the Hymn of Ahuna Vairya) (is) “most
victorious in every enterprise.” The root of the word yahi is yah = Sanskrit yas = to try, to en-
deavour.

zd If we take thwaesho equivalent to the Sanskrit tvisha (i.e. to shine, to glitter), the meaning of
maso va thwaesho will be or “at the time of great brilliance”, i.e. to say, when streaks of light -
ning take place.

ze In Avesta a double vocabulary has been developed and a distinct set of terms is employed for
the good and wicked beings, and for daevas:- e.g. hanjamana, i.e. an assembly of good and vir-
tuous men; “handvarana”, i.e. gathering of the daevas and of wicked men; zasta, i.e. the hand of
good man; gava i.e. the hand the demon or wicked man vaghdhana, i.e. the head of the good
man; kameredha i.e. the head of the demon or wicked man; pddha, i.e. the foot of a good man;
zangra, i.e. foot of the demon or wicked man; vach, i.e. to speak (of a good man); du, i.e. to
howl (of the demon).

zf Arathya = bad event or ill-ominous event (Prof. Justi and Harlez); Prof. Darmesteter trans-
lates it, “by law, commandment of the religion, doctrine”.


--- Page 201 ---

SROSH YASHT HADOKHT 185

cannot” see him® with his two eyes™; (and) the malice” of the robbers™ of a

strong “clique cannot® reach”? him (that reciter of Ahunavar).

(6) Imatcha!, Zarathushtra’, imat? ukhdhem‘ vach6* framriiyao’, yat’
ajasat’, keresascha’, gadhotiishcha™, daéveshcha" handvaremna”; dat!
dravatam"™ daévayasnanam', yatushcha’ yatumatam"”; pairikaoscha™
pairikavatam’ tbaésho” frateresan?! fradvaran” nyaonch6d* daéva™
nyaonchd* daévayazo”*, zafare”’ ava-géurvayan” atha” rareshyanto™.

(7) Yathacha*' pasush-haurvaongh6”, aétat** sraoshem™ ashim*
pairi-baramaide*, yim*” ashavanem**  verethrajanem®”’,  aétat*°
Sraoshem" ashim” fra-yazamaide®, yim“ ashavanem* verethrajanem*
humataishcha “ hukhtaishcha® hvarshtaishcha”.

(6) O Zarathushtra*! thou shouldst recite this' (hymn) too, nay this’ song
of praise (i.e. Ahunavar), (so that) when enemies of the religion’ the gang of
brigands'’® and demons"! come up® rushing together'’, (and) when’? malice”’
of the wicked ones’ and the daeva-worshippers’’, the wizards'®, those
addicted to sorcery'’, the witches'® (or anyone) of the adherents of the
pairikas'® frighten! (thee, O Zarathushtra!) rush forward” (to thee), (then by
reciting that hymn) the demons™ demon-worshippers”*(are) destroyed*> and
the mouths”’ of those who inflict wounds*’ “get closed’, thus”.

(7) Just as*! we “keep around* the Pasush-harun” (i.e. the dogs that
protect the cattle), the same way** We praise® (or we worship*) Srosh*!
(yazata) the holy” who” is righteous* (and) victorious”, with good
thoughts*’, good words® and good deeds”.

(8) “Ahe! raya? khvarenanghacha’, anghe* ama* verethraghnacha’®,
ahe’ yasna® yazatanam’, tem’? yazai'! surunvata” yasna’ Sraoshem"™
ashim'’ zaothrabyod'’, ashimcha!’ vanguhim"™ berezaitim’, nairimcha”’
sanghem”! huraodhem”. Acha® nd* jamyat®> avanghe”, verethrajao”’
Sraosh6”’ ashyo”.

(9) Sraoshem*’ ashim*! yazamaide”; ratim® berezantem™ yaza-
maide*, yim** Ahurem Mazdam*’, yo* ashahe*’apandtem6”, yo*' asha-
he” jaghmishtemd*. Vispa“ sravao* Zarathushtri* yazamaide“’. Vispa-
cha** hvarshta” shyaothna® yazamaide*!, varshtacha” vareshyam-
nacha®,

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

zg The thief who carries away the herd of cattle. (Prof. Harlez and Darmesteter).
zh i.e. wicked men cannot succeed in their wicked motives.

zi i.e. Just as the shepherd’s dog (pasush-harun) keep watch over the cattle from wolves and
thieves, the same way we count upon Sraosha yazata for our care.

zj Dr. Geldner takes the entire paragraph 8 in verse form of nine lines. Every line ends with
comma (,) and full-stop (.).


--- Page 202 ---

186 KHORDEH AVESTA

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(8) On account of his* (Srosh’s) splendour’? and glory*, on account of his*
courage’ and victory’, on account of his’ fame* I worship'’ him with the
famous’ yasna’? amongst the yazatas’. (We worship) Srosh (yazata) the
holy'®, and the exalted!’ Ashi-Vanguhi'”!* and the beautiful'® (messenger
called) *“Neryosangha”*”! with libations'®. May the victorious?’ Srosh”®
(yazata) the Holy”? come”? unto” us™ for help*®! (9) We worship* the
exalted** Lord** who* (is) Ahura Mazda*’, who** (is) the highest*® in
holiness® and who*! (is) most helpful? in holiness’. We praise*’ all“ the
sacred verses* of (the Prophet) Zarathushtra*’. We praise*! all*® well-
performed” deeds*’ (which) have been performed* and (which) shall be
performed hereafter’.

(Kardah IT) (10) Sraoshem! ashim’? huraodhem’ verethrajanem‘
fradat-gaéthem® ashavanem¢ ashahe’ ratiim® yazamaide®. “YO! vanano"!
kayadhahe”, yo" vanano"™ kaidhyehe'’, yo" janta!’ daévayao'® drujo”,
ash-aojangho”” ahim-merench6d”'; yo” hareta** aiwyakhshtacha”, vispa-
yao’ fravoish”’ gaéthayao”’, (11) YO"* anavanghabdemn6d” jaénangha”™”,
nipaiti®! Mazdao” daman**; yo*! anavanghabdemn6* jaénangha”, nish-
haurvaiti®”?’ Mazdao* daman*®. Yo vispem*! ahim* astvantem*,
eredhwa“ snaithisha* nipaiti*, pascha hi frashmod-aitim”. (12) Yo*
noit® paschaéta® hushkhvafa*', yat* mainya* daman*™ daidhitem*,
yascha® Spentd Mainyush*’ yasha® angro”; hisharo” ashahe“! gaéthao”.
Yod® vispaish* ayancha® khshafnascha® yiidhyeiti’ mazanyaéibyo®
hadha® daévatibyo”. (13) Hd” ndit” tarshtd” franamaite’ thwaéshat”
paro” daévaéibyo” fra ahmat’® pard” vispe™ daéva*! anusd™ tarshta®
nemente™, tarshta® temangh6* dvarente*’

(10) We praise? Srosh (yazata) the holy’, beautiful’, the victorious’
bringing-prosperity to the world’ and righteous®, (who is) the Lord® of
righteousness’. Who" (is) the smiter!' of wicked man’’, who’ (Srosh yazata)
is the smiter'’ of the devilish'® druj'®, extremely strong” (and) destroyer of
the world'; (and) who” (is) the thriver*? and watcher™% of the entire”
progress”? of the world’. (11) Who’ never falling asleep” guards*! with
vigilance® the creatures*? of Ahura Mazda’; who“ guards*® the entire*!
corporeal* world” with weapon* uplifted“ (ie. held in hand)” after the
setting of the sun*’. (12) Who* (i.e. Srosh yazata) is never sleeping*' ever

zk Ashishvangh is the yazata presiding over truthfulness, piety and wealth; Neryosang is, like
Sraosha, the Messenger of the Creator Ahura Mazda.

zl Dr. Geldner takes the portion from here up to gaéthay4o in verse-form of six lines and the
para eleventh in the verse form of seven lines.

zm If we consider the word “fravoish” as an adjective of “gaéthayao” the meaning of this sen-
tence can be:- “Who (i.e. Sraosha yazata) is the warden and watcher of all the moving world;”
root fru-Sanskrit pru = to move, to run.


--- Page 203 ---

SROSH YASHT HADOKHT 187

since the day when” the two Spirits® - the Spena-Mino*’ and the ”Angra-
Mino” - created* (all) creations™. (Who is) the protector® of the world” of
righteousness’. Who® fights®’ against® the demons” of Mazandaran®
every™ day® and every night®. (13) He”! never stricken with terror” bows
down” (to them) the demons through” fright”; but on the contrary’*”, all®°
the demons®’ striken with terror’ bow down™ (to him) against their will®,
(and) terror-stricken® run away*’ into darkness*.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghanacha, ahe
yasna yazatanadm tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim
zaothrabyd, Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairlmcha Sanghem
huraodhem. Acha nd jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd.
Sraoshem ashim yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim
Ahurem Mazdam, yd ashahe apandtemd, yO ashahe jaghmishtemd.
Vispa sravao Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna
yazamaide, varshtacha vareshymnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah ITD) (14) Yatha Ahi Vairyé 1. Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem?
verethrajanem‘* fradat-gaéthem®’ ashavanem® ashahe’ ratiim*® yaza-
maide’. Y6" akhshtishcha" urvaitishcha” druj6'* spasy6"; spénishtahe'*
avan'® Ameshao Spenta!’ avi’? haptd-karshvairim” zim”. YO daéno-
dis6” daénayao* ahmai™ daénam” daésayat”® Ahurd Mazdao”’ ashava’®,

(14) We praise’ the beautiful’, the victorious’ bringing-prosperity to the
world’ and holy’, Srosh (Yazata) the righteous’, (who is) the Lord® of
righteousness’, and (is) the “watcher'* (from the onslaughts and from the
malice) of the druj’? with friendship'' and advice’?. The Bountiful
Immortals’? (created) by the Most Beneficent One! (i.e. Ahura Mazda)
“afford protection on'® the seven regions!’ of the earth*®. Who”! (is) “the
teacher of the religion” for the Faith”, (and) Holy** Ahura Mazda?’ taught’®
the religion*> to him™.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama varethraghnacha, ahe yasna

zn after midnight (Darmesteter).

zo Under the chieftainship of the Creator Ahura Mazda, and by His command the two spirits,
Spena-Mino and Angra-Mino carry on some work pertaining to this world. For further details,
see Zartosht Namun, Chapter 4, published by Sheth K.R. Camaji.

zp For the translation of this entire paragraph, see paragraphs 8-9 of this yasht.

zq Or alternately:- Who (i.e. Sraosha yazata) (having opposed) the druj is the protector of
friendship and peace.

zr Originally this verb is imperfect subjunctive.

zs Hoshedarbami, Hoshedarmah and Soshyos (Pahlavi) Darmesteter.


--- Page 204 ---

188 KHORDEH AVESTA

yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; . Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyd.
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nd jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yd
ashahe apandtemd, yd ashahe jaghmishtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha “vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah IV) (15) Yatha Ahi Vairyo 1. Sraoshem! ashim’ huraodhem
3 verethrajanem‘ fradat-gaéthem* ashavanem® ashahe’ ratim® yaza-
maide’. Yim’ dathat'' Ahurd Mazdao” ashava’ aéshmahe™ khravi-
draosh’’ hamaéstarem’® akhshtim’” hamvaintim' yazamaide”, paresh-
tascha”’ mravayaoscha 7! hamaéstara”’.

(16) Hakhaya”’ Sraoshahe™ ashyehe”*, hakhaya”’ Rashnaosh”’ razish-
tahe’*, hakhaya” Mithrahe* vouru-gaoyaoitoish*', hakhaya” Vatahe*
ashaond**, hakhaya*® Daénayao*’ vanghuyao*” Mazdayasndish*,
hakhaya® Arshtato” fradat-gaéthayao" varedat-gaéthayao” savo-
gaéthayao*, hakhaya“ Ashdish* vanghuyao”, hakhaya*’’ Chistdish®
vanghuyao”, hakhaya *° razishtayao*! Chistayao™, (17) Hakhaya®
vispaésham™ yazatanam*, hakhaya® Manthrahe Spentahe*’, hakhaya®
datahe” vidaévahe”, hakhaya® dareghayéo” upayanayao®, hakhaya™
Ameshanam Spentanim®, hakhaya® ahmakem® saoshyantam® yat®
bipaitishtanam”ashaonam”, hakhaya” vispayao” ashaon6” stdish”.

(15) We praise’ the beautiful’, victorious*, bringing-prosperity to the
world’, holy’, Srosh (yazata)' the righteous’ (who is) the Lord® of
righteousness’ whom’? Holy Ahura Mazda” created'' as an opponent'® (or
rival'®) of (the demon) Aéshma" (armed with) terrible weapon'>. We praise'®
peace’’ (and) victorious strength’? (which are) the two enemies” of war”? and
enmity’. (16) (We praise all of them, viz.) the friends”® of Srosh (yazata)”*
the holy” the friends”® of the Most Just”® Rashna’’ (yazata), the friends? of
Meher (yazata)*? of-wide-pastures*', the friends* of the holy** Govad*?
(yazata), the friends* of the good’? Mazda-worshipping** Religion*’, the
friends® of Arshtat*® (yazata), causing the world to increase*! (prosper) and
rendering it benefit, the friends of Ashi-Vanguhi* “°, the friends® of the
most truthful’! knowledge” (i.e. of the religious instruction). (17) (We praise
or we worship) the friends™ of all** the yazatas®, the friends** of ”"Manthra

zt For the translation of this paragraph, see paragraphs 8-9 of this yasht.
zu Professor Darmesteter. The meaning of this word has not been ascertained.

zv i.e. Sacred verses of Avesta. See Ardibehesht yasht, para 6.


--- Page 205 ---

SROSH YASHT HADOKHT 189

Spenta®’, the friends*® of anti-demoniac” laws”, the friends®' of ”“old
traditions’ of long duration”, the friends of the Amesha Spentas® - the
Bountiful Immortals® the friends®’, of us®’ the benefactors® amongst the
righteous” men”, (and) the “friends” of the entire” creation” of Holy”
(Ahura Mazda).

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna, Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyd,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
no jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yd
ashahe apandtemd, yd ashahe jaghmishtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha vareshyamnacha.”

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah V) (18) Yatha Ahi Vairy6 1. Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem?
verethrajanem‘ fradat-gaéthem®’ ashavanem® ashahe’ ratim® yaza-
maide’, paoirimcha’” upememcha" madhememcha” fratememcha™
paoiryacha™ yasna'* upamacha’® madhemacha” fratemacha’.

(18) We worship’ the beautiful’, victorious’, bringing-prosperity to the
world’, (and) holy’, Srosh' (yazata) the righteous? (who is) the Lord® of
righteousness’ and (who is) the foremost’®, highest!’ and supreme, yasna’>.

Explanation:- (In the above sentence same adjectives which are applied
to the yasna in honour of the holy Srosh yazata hold good for him. As
regards the various kinds of yasna, the following explanation is offered in the
Pahlavi version:- the foremost yasna is the yasna of Navar: the highest yasna
is that of Vispered; the middle-most yasna is that of Hadokht of one
Hamayast. His position is to be considered in accordance with the type of
yasna to be consecrated in honour of Srosh yazata).

(19) Vispao’’ Sraoshahe” ashyehe?! takhmahe” tanu-manthrahe’’,
takhmahe*  ham-varetivatd*® = bazush-aojanghd** _—srathaéshtao”’
kamaredho-jano* daévanam”; vanatd* vanaitish*! vanaitivato”,

zw Religious education, Religious studies, instruction (Spiegel and Justi); the long-traditional
teaching (Darmesteter).

zx In this paragraph are mentioned the friends of several abstract nouns; its significance should
be understood as other qualities having relation with those virtues; e.g. the friends of wisdom,
i.e. other qualities holding with wisdom, such as politeness, far-sightedness; common sense,
sharp intellect, etc. The significance of the friends of the good Mazda-worshipping Religion and
of wisdom can also be this - the choosers of the good Mazda-worshipping Religion and of wis-
dom.

zy For the translation of this paragraph, see paragraphs 8-9 of this yasht.


--- Page 206 ---

190 KHORDEH AVESTA

ashaon6*® vanato™ vanaitish* vanaintimcha® uparatatem*’ yazamaide*;
yamcha® sraoshahe” ashyehe*!, yamcha® Arshtodish* yazatahe“. (20)
Vispa*® nmana “ Sraosh6-pata” yazamaide*, yenghadha® Sraosho™
ashyo*! fray6™, fritd**, paiti-zant6™; nacha® ashava™, frayd-humato””,
frayo-hukht6o™, frayo-hvarshto”.

(19) (We extol) all’? (the triumphs) of Srosh”® (yazata) the holy*!, the
brave”, the word-incarnate” (i.e. whose body even is the Holy Manthra), the
powerful” protector? mighty-armed”®, the warrior?’ (and) the smiter of the
skulls”* of the daevas”; (we extol) the victories*' of (Srosh yazata) the holy*,
the smiter*®, the smiter with success’. We extol** the greatest*” victory*®
which” is of the holy*! Srosh (yazata)*® and which” (is) of “Arshtat*
yazata™*. (20) We praise* all** the dwellings® guarded by him*’, wherein” the
holy*! (yazata)” (is) friendly’, loved** (and) respected™ (and in which
houses) the holy** man*® (is) richer in good thoughts*’, in good words*, and
good deeds”.

(21) Kehrpem® Sraoshahe*! ashyehe® yazamaide™; kehrpem™
Rashnaosh® razishtahe® yazamaide”’; kehrpem® Mithrahe® vouru-
gaoyaoitdish” yazamaide”; kehrpem” Vatahe” ashaond” yazamaide”;
kehrpem’ daénayao” vanghuyao”® Mazdayasnoish” yazamaide*;
kehrpem* Arshtato’ fradat-gaéthayao* varedat-gaéthayao* savo-
gaéthayao* yazamaide*; kehrpem*’ Ashdish®® vanghuyao” yazamaide”;
kehrpem’! Chistoish” vanghuyao” yazamaide™; kehrpem” razishtayao”
Chistayao” yazamaide”; (22) kehrpem” vispaésham'” yazatanam!
yazamaide? kehrpem*? Manthrahe Spentahe* yazamaide*; kehrpem®
datahe’ vidaévahe® yazamaide’? kehrpem! dareghayéo" upayanaydéo”
yazamaide’; kehrpem'* Ameshanim Spentanaim!'® yazamaide';
kehrpem” ahmakem"® Saoshyantaém” yat” bipaitishtanam?! ashaonam”
yazamaide”; kehrpem” vispayao* ashaon6” stdish”” yazamaide”.

(21) We praise® the body” of the holy® Srosh (yazata)*'; we praise®’ the
body” of the most just® Rashna (yazata)®; we praise’’ the body® of Meher
(yazata)®, the Lord of wide pastures”; we praise” the body” of the holy”
Govad (yazata)’ we praise’ the principal matters’ of good’ Mazda-
worshipping” Religion”; we praise® the body*! of Astad (yazata)®, causing
the world to increase®, to prosper™ and rendering it benefit; we praise” the
body*’ of Ashi*® Vanguhi®; we praise” the ““principal matters*! of good”
knowledge” (or wisdom”); we praise” the principal matters? of the most
truthful’ knowledge” (or religious education). (22) We praise’ the body” of
all’®’ yazatas' - the Worshipful Ones; we praise° the principal matters’ of

zz For Astad generally the word “Arshtat” occurs.

aaa The original meaning of the word “kehrpem” is “body”; but just as in English language, the
word body is used for the principal part of anything besides “body”, in the same way, the mean-
ing of “Kehrpem” should be understood here.


--- Page 207 ---

SROSH YASHT HADOKHT 191

Manthra Spenta*; we praise’ the principal matters® of the anti-demoniac*®
Laws’ (i.e. of Vendidad) we praise’? the principal matters'® of old traditions”
of long duration''; we praise'® the body’* of the Amesha Spentas’* - the
Bountiful Immortals; we praise*? the body’? of righteous men?', our
benefactors'’®; we praise** the principal matters™* of the entire? creation”’ of
Holy’® (Ahura Mazda).

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyd,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nod jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yd
ashahe apandtem6d, yd ashahe jaghmishtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide, vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha **vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite to baz) Sarosh asho, tagi, tan-farman, shekaft-zin, zin-
avzar, salare dimane Ahura Mazda berasad; aediin bad. (To recite
aloud); Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami, Sraoshahe
ashyehe, takhmahe tanu-manthrahe, darshi-draosh ahiiryehe. Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem, Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje khoreh awazayad Sarosh asho, tagi, tan-farman, shekaft-zin,
zin-avazar, salare damane Ahura Mazda, berasad amavand pirozgar
amavandih pirozgarl. Dad din beh Mazdayasnan, agahi ravai
goafarangani bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man 4no Avayad
shudan, man ano Avayad shudan, man 4no Aavayad shudan. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite facing the south) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarathushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sira Anahite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem6 urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

aab For the translation of this paragraph, see paragraphs 8-9 of this yasht.


--- Page 208 ---

192 KHORDEH AVESTA

Sraoshem ashim huraodhem  verethrajanem  fradat-gaéthem
ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 1.

Sarosh asho, tagi, tan-farman, shekaft-zin, zin-awazar, salare
damane Ahura Mazda berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

NIRANG OF SROSH YASHT HADOKHT

(Note: This nirang should be recited three times after the recital of Srosh
yasht Hadokht).

Gorje'® khoreh’” awazayad”® Sarosh”! asho, tagi*, tan-farman”,
shekaft-zin**, zin-awazar’, salare diamane Ahura Mazda”’ berasad”*;
aediin” bad*. Ashem Vohi 1.

May the splendour’’ and glory’’ of Srosh’! (yazata) who is righteous”,
powerful”, the word-incarnate™ (i.e. whose body is Manthra-Holy Spell),
possessed of efficacious, victorious weapon” (and) the Lord of the creatures
of Ahura Mazda’’! (May Srosh yazata with the above-mentioned epithets)
come”* (unto my help)! May it be*® so”! (i.e. may the blessings I asked be
fulfilled unto me!)

SROSH YASHT VADI
°K hshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdan Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini gorje khoreh
awazayad; Sarosh asho, tagi, tan-farman, shekaft-zin, zin-avazar, salare
damane Ahura Mazda berasad. Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az
harvastin dushmata duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa getI manid, oem
goft, oem kard, oem jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni
gavashni kunashni, tani ravani geti minodani, okhe avakhsh pashem4n,
pa sé gavashni pa patet hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, tardidite
angrahe mainyéush; Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashdtemem.
Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohii 3.

aac This yasht is taken from yasna Ha 57, and like other yashts the origin is not different. In this
entire ha, matter pertaining to Sraosha yazata has occurred. From this its name “Srosh yasht
Vadi” is kept by separating this Ha like other yashts and by adding in it the initial and final
Pazend passages. In the Darab Hormazdyar Persian Rivayets, in some places the name “‘Sarosha
yashte yazashne” (i.e. Srosh yasht of the yazashne or occurring in the yazashne) to this yasht is
given. Since it is recited for the first three nights in honour of the departed ones, this yasht is
also known by the name “yashta se shab” (i.e. yasht of the three nights) from that. Amongst our
Zoroastrians there is a custom of reciting this yasht only at night. The import of reciting this
yasht at night is that Sraosha yazata protects that reciter in sleep from the attacks of demons,
drujas or other wicked creations. Truly speaking there is no objection whatever if the yasht is re-
cited at any time. During the day-time when yozdathragar Mobed performs the yazashna, he
does not leave off that entire Srosh yasht (which as stated above is yasna ha 57 but recites the
entire yasht. As regards the explanation and notes of this entire Srosh yasht, see my translation
of Yazishn and Vispered, Ha 57.


--- Page 209 ---

SROSH YASHT VADI 193

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévo Ahura-tkaésho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. (1) Sraoshahe ashyehe,
takhmahe, tanu-manthrahe, darshi-draosh Ahiiryehe, khshnaothra
yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi
VairyO zaota fra-me mrite, atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava
vidhvao *“‘mraoti.

(Kardah I) (2) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem:’ verethrajanem/‘ fradat-
gaéthem® ashavanem® ashahe’ ratim® yazamaide’. YO" paoiryo |
Mazdao” daman", frasteretat'’* paiti® baresman’, yazata!’ Ahurem
Mazdam", yazata'? Ameshe Spente”, yazata”! payi” thworeshtara”’, ya
vispa* thweresat6** daman?’.

(2) We worship® the beautiful’, victorious*, bringing prosperity to the
world’, holy® Srosh (yazata) the righteous’, the Lord® of righteousness’;
who" first!! worshipped’’ (the Creator) Ahura Mazda'® with “‘the Barsam’®
spread out’ amongst (all the) creatures’? of (the Creator) Ahura Mazda’
(who) worshipped the Amesha Spentas” - the Bountiful Immortals’, - (and
who) *“worshipped both the protector” (and) the fashioner”’, of the entire”
creation’.

(3) Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe
yasna yazatanaim tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim
zaothrabyd, Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairlmcha Sanghem
huraodhem. Acha nod jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyo. (4)
Sraoshem ashim yazamaide; ratiim berezantem yazamaide, yim
Ahurem Mazdam, yo ashahe apandtemd, yO ashahe jaghmushtemd.
Vispa sravao Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna
yazamaide, varshtacha **vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah II) (5) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem? verethrajanem*
fradat-gaéthem*® ashavanem® ashahe’ ratim® yazamaide’. (6) Yo"
paoiryo" baresma’  frasterenata’ thrayakhshtishcha’, pancha-
yakhshtishcha'’, hapta-yakhshtishcha’’, nava-yakhshtisheha’ akhsh-
nishcha'® maidhyo-paitishtanascha’, Ameshanam Spentanam”’ yas-

aad For the translation of this paragraph, see Srosh Baz.

aae Having tied the bundles of “Barsam” (Darmesteter). For Barsam, see explanation to
Khorshed Nyayesh, par. 16.

aaf This seems to refer to the two spirits under the control of the Creator Ahura Mazda, Spenta
Mainyu and Angra Mainyu. For its explanation, see page 8, note 3. Protector and the judge, i.e.
Meher yazata and the Most Just Rashna, the Judge at the Chinvat Bridge (Professor Jackson).

aag For its translation, see Srosh yasht Hadokht First Karda.


--- Page 210 ---

194 KHORDEH AVESTA

naicha”' vahmaicha” khshnaothraicha” frasastayaécha™.

(5) We worship® the beautiful’, victorious*, bringing prosperity to the
world’ (and) holy’, Srosh' (yazata) the righteous’, (who is) the Lord® of
Righteousness’. (6) Who'® first'! spread '° the Baresman” of three-twigs",
five-twigs', seven-twigs'® and nine-twigs'’, as high as the knee'® and “as
high as the middle of the leg’’, for the worship”’ of Amesha Spentas”’ for
(their) praise” propitiation” and glorification”.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyo,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nO jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide. yim Ahurem Mazdam, yo
ashahe apandtemd, yd ashahe jaghmishtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha *“vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah III) (7) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem* verethrajanem*
fradat-gaéthem’ ashavanem¢’ ashahe’ ratim® yazamaide’. (8) Y6 paoiryo
gathao frasravayat, yao pancha Spitamahe ashaond Zarathushtrahe,
afsmanivan vachastashtivat, mat-azaintish, mat-paiti-frasao, Amesha-
nam Spentanam yasnaicha vahmiaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha.

(7) We worship’ the beautiful’, victorious’ bringing-prosperity to the
world® and holy®, Srosh! (yazata) the righteous? (who is) the Lord® of
righteousness’. (8) Who'° first'' chanted aloud’ the five'’ Gathas’? of (the
Lord) Holy'’ Spitaman'® Zarathushtra'’, together with the verses'’, strophes
properly arranged”, with commentaries”! and “Icatechism”’, for the worship
of the Amesha Spentas”’, for (their) praise’’, propitiation”® and glorification’.

Explanation:- (Nowhere the verb “recite” occurs for the Gathas and
Ahunavar, but the verb “sravaya” Sanskrit sravaya i.e. to chant occurs. It
will be clearly seen from this that the Gathas as well as the Ahunavar prayer
should not be recited as we Zoroastrians recite other Avesta at present, but
they should be chanted like songs. The meaning of the word Gathda is
equivalent to Sanskrit Gatha “Holy Song”).

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyo,

aah It seems to signify the length of the twig.
aai For its translation, see Karda First of Srosh yasht Hadokht.

aaj For its comparison, see Vispered, Karda XIV, para 1.


--- Page 211 ---

SROSH YASHT VADI 195

Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem.

Acha nd jamyat avanghe verethrajao sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem
ashim yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam,
yO ashahe apandtemd, yO ashahe jaghmishtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha vareshyamnacha."“

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah IV) (9) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem* verethrajanem*
fradat-gaéthem® ashavanem‘, ashahe’ ratiim*® yazamaide’. (10) Y6"
drighaoscha" driviyaoscha’amavat'? nmanem"™ hiam-tashtem'*. Pascha
hai frashmod-daitim’’, yo!’ aéshmem®  sterethwata’  snaithisha”
vikhrimantem”! khvarem” jainti”, atcha™* he* badha** kameredhem2’
jaghnavao” paiti” khvanghayeiti”, yatha*! aojao” naidhyaonghem*®.

(9) We worship’ the beautiful’, victorious’, bringing-prosperity to the
world’ holy® Srosh (yazata) the righteous? (who is) the Lord® of
righteousness’. (10) Who” (is) strong!’, built!> house!* of “needy man! and
woman”. Also who” from the time of the twilight of the dawn'® smites” a
mighty”! blow” to (the demon) Aeshma with “levelled’? weapon”; and
having smitten’® it he assuredly “"breaks to pieces*® (that skull), as he
scorns® the power” of Srosh Yazata.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyd,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nO jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yo
ashahe apandtem6d, yd ashahe jaghmishtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha *°vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

aak For its translation, see Karda I of Srosh yasht Hadokht.
aal i.e. Sraosha yazata protects poor man and woman.

aam In the sense of English “levelled”; aimed at an object by bringing it up to the level of the
eyes. Its analogy is arethwa (uplifted), see para 16 of this yasht.

aan Or alternately; Just as*' a strong man” (crushes) the oppressor®’; (in the same way Sraosha
yazata) having smitten*® on his” (i.e. the demon Aéshma’s) head?’ assuredly breaks (it) to
pieces”. Taking in this way the root of the word “naidhyaonghem” is Sanskrit nadh, nath = to
oppress, to request, to appeal.

aao For its translation, see Kardah 1 of Sraosha Yasht Hadokht.


--- Page 212 ---

196 KHORDEH AVESTA

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah V) (11) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem’ verethrajanem‘
fradat-gaéthem* ashavanem® ashahe’ ratim® yezamaide’, takhmem"
asim" aojanghvantem”, dareshatem™, sirem' berezaidhfm'*. (12) Y6"*
vispaéibyo” hacha'® arezaéibyo'’® vavanvao'’ paiti-jasaiti?? vyakhma”!
Ameshanam Spentanam”.

(11) We worship’ the righteous? and holy* Srosh yazata beautiful’,
victorious’, bringing-prosperity to the world’ (who is) the Lord® of
righteousness’, brave'®, swift'', possessed of strength’’, terrible’? (to the
daevas), valiant'* (and) observing from a high stand point'*. (12) Who'* from
all’’ battles'® (with the daevas) goes’ as a victor (with victoriousness'’) to the
assembly”! (i.e. in the assembly) of the Amesha Spentas”.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam, tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyo,
Ashimcha Vanguhim, berezaitim, nairtmcha Sanghem huraodhem.
Acha no jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yo
ashahe apandtem6d, yd ashahe jaghmishtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha *?vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah VI) (13) Sraoshem! ashim’? huraodhem’ verethrajanem*
fradat-gaéthem’ ashavanem® ashahe ratiim’ yazamaide*; yinam?
aojishtem™, yinam" tanjishtem”’, yinam’ thwakhshishtem"™, yinam'
asishtem'*, yinam'’ pardkatarshtemem". Paitishata!? Mazdayasna”
Sraoshahe”! ashyehe” yasnem”. (14) Dirat™ hacha ahmat nmanat*,
dirat* hacha anghat visat*®, dirat** hacha ahmat zantaot?’, dirat”
hacha anghat danghaot”, aghao”, ithyejao” voighna6" yeinti”; yenghe*
nmanya™ Sraosho* ashy6o* verethrahjao*’, thrafedho* asti*® paiti-
zanto”; nacha‘! ashava”, frayd-humatd*, frayo-hikhto“, frayd-
hvarshto*.

(13) We worship® the righteous? and holy Srosh' (yazata), beautiful’,
victorious’, bringing-prosperity to the world*, Lord of righteousness’,
strongest", firmest!*, most active'* swiftest!® and ““desirous'* among the
youths'’. O worshippers of Mazda”! you desire eagerly’? the yasna” of
Sraosha (yazata)*' the Holy” (i.e. you wish to consecrate the yazishn in

aap For its translation, see Karda | of Sraosh Yasht Hadokht.

aaq Paro = before; root kam = Sanskrit kam = to wish; kam + tar + tema, sh in the middle is su-
perficial. “Most adventurous, undertaker of most risy works” (Harlez).


--- Page 213 ---

SROSH YASHT VADI 197

honour of the Holy Srosh so that he may come to your help). (14) Far away**
from that house*, from that town?’ (and) country’’, the evil” (and)
destructive*’ troubles*' *“go (disappear) in whose* house* the holy*%,
victorious*’ and satisfied** (yazata) is*® honoured*® and (in whose house) the
holy” man‘! is richer in good thoughts*, good words“ and good deeds”.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyd,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nO jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratum berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yd
ashahe apandtemd, yd ashahe jaghmushtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha **vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah VID (15) Sraoshem ashim huraodhem verethrajanem
fradat-gaethem ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide. yO vanand
kayadhahe, yO vanand kaidhyehe, yO janta daevayao drujd ash-
aojanghd ahum-merenchd; yd hareta aiwyakhshtacha vispayao fravoish
gaethayao. (16) YO anavanghabdemnd zaenangha nipaiti Mazdao
daman; yd anavanghabdemnOd zaenangha nish-haurvaiti Mazdao
daman. YO vispem ahum astvantem eredhwa snaithisha nipaiti pascha
hu frashm6-daitim. (17) YO nodit paschaeta hushkhvafa, yat mainyu
daman daidhitem, yascha Spentd Mainyush yascha angrd hishard
ashahe gaethao. YO vispaish ayancha khshafnascha yuidhyeiti
mazanyaeibyo hadha daevaeibyd.™ (18) Hd noit tarshtd franamaite
thwaeshat pard daevaeibyd; fra ahmat paro vispe daeva anuso tarshta
nemente, tarshta temangh6 dvarente.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyo,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nO jamyat avanghe verethrajao sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratum berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yo
ashahe apandtemd, yd ashahe jaghmushtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
aar From that country calamity’, destruction” and plague vanish” (Darmesteter).

aas For its translation, see first Kardah of Sraosha Yasht Hadokht.
aat As regards the translation of Kardah VII, see Kardah Second of Sraosha yasht Hadokht.


--- Page 214 ---

198 KHORDEH AVESTA

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah VIII) (19) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem* verethrajanem‘,
fradat-gaéthem’ ashavanem’ ashahe’ ratim® yazamaide’. Yim" yazata"
Haom6” Frashmish", baéshazyo", sriro, khshathray6"’, zairi-doithrd'’,
barezishte'® paiti’? barezahi?? Haraithyd paiti Berezayao?'. (20)
Hvachao” papd-vachao”*, pairi-g40 vachao~, paithimnd” vispd-paésim”®
mastim” yam” pouru-azaintim”’ manthrahecha” paurvatatem*.

(19) We worship® the righteous? and holy® Srosh' (yazata), beautiful’,
victorious’, bringing-prosperity to the world’, (and) the Lord® of
righteousness’; whom!’ Haoma”, prosperity-bringer’’, healing", beautiful’,
kingly'® (and) golden-eyed’’ worshipped"! upon’? the highest'® peak” of the
Mount Albourz”'. (20) (It is Haoma who is) the speaker of good words”, the
reciter of the words of (the Nask) “"“Papo””™ and the reciter of the words of
the Nask “Pairi-ga”; (and it is Haoma who is) going on the path? of the
excellence*! of Manthra (i.e. the mysterious verses of the Zoroastrian
Religion)*° and of the greatness”’ (or wisdom) of that Manthra, all-adorned”®

29 aav

with full commentaries”’.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyd,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nO jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yo
ashahe apanOdtem06 yo ashahe jaghmishtem6. Vispa sravao Zarathushtri
yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide, varshtacha
“=“vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah IX) (21) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem* verethrajanem‘
fradat-gaéthem*® ashavanem® ashahe’ ratiim*® yazamaide’. Yenghe'’
nmanem" varethraghni’, hazangrostinem™, vidhatem™ barezishte's
paiti'® barezahi'’’ Haraithyo paiti Barezayao'’, khvaraokhshnem”

aau Nasks called Papo and Pairi-ga should be understood as “Pajeh” (Pajam) and “Barash” oc-
curring in Pahlavi language. The word ‘“‘Pajeh” can also be read as “Pape”; similarly the word
“barash” can be read “barega” (whose Avesta equivalent is pairiga) (Ervad S.D. Bharucha). Tak-
ing this into account “Papo” and “Pairiga’” can be included in 21Nasks. For the explanation of
21 Nasks see page 149”. “Sacred verse that protects”, “timely (or appropriate) verse”
(Darmesteter); “the warning or guarding words” (Mills).

aav Haoma who possesses all wisdom replete with knowledge and chieftainship over holy word.
(Darmesteter).

aaw For its translation, see first Kardah of Srosh Yasht Hadokht.


--- Page 215 ---

SROSH YASHT VADI 199

antaranaémat”’ stehrpaésem”!' nishtara-naémat”. (22) Yenghe”® Ahunod
Yairyo™ snaithish® visata* verethrajao”’, yasnascha* Haptanghiaitish”,
Fshushascha Manthrd*! yo” varethraghnish*, vispaoscha* yasn6-
karetayod*.

(21) We worship’ the righteous? and holy® Srosh' (yazata) beautiful’,
victorious‘, bringing-prosperity to the world®, (and) Lord® of Righteousness’.
Whose”’ a thousand pillared’* strong'* house", victorious’, self-shining’®
from the inside” (and) star-bedecked?! from the outside” (is situated) on the
highest!> peak’’ of the Mount Albourz'*. (22) (Whose”’) (i.e. Srosh yazata’s)
victorious*’ weapon? Ahunavar™ and ““Haptan” yasht”® and victorious*
“’Fshusha*? Manthra*! and all** *’the sections of yasna* have agreed”? (to
serve).

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyo,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nO jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yo
ashahe apandtem6d, yd ashahe jaghmishtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha *“vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah X) (23) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem’ verethrajanem‘
fradat-gaéthem*® ashavanem® ashahe’ ratiim*® yazamaide’. Yenghe'’
amacha" verethraghnacha”’, haozathwacha’’ vaédhyacha“’ avan's
Ameshao Spenta” avi!’ hapto-karshvairim™ zim”. (24) YO” daén6-dis6”!
daénayao” vaso-khshathro” fracharaiti4, avi ** yam” astvaitim?’
gaétham”®. Aya” daénaya* fraorenta*' Ahurd Mazdao* ashava*’, fra
Vohu Manod™, fri Ashem Vahishtem*, fra Khshathrem Vairtlm*, fra
Spenta Armaitish?’, fra Haurvatas**, fra Ameretatas®, fra Ahiirish”
frashno" fra Ahiirish® tkaésho“.

(23) We worship’ the righteous? and holy® Srosh' (yazata) the beautiful’,
victorious‘, bringing-prosperity to the world®, (and) Lord® of righteousness’.
Through whose'® courage"', victory’’, good wisdom'* and knowledge", the

aax For its explanation, see Haptan Yasht Large, Kardah 1, first note.
aay i.e. the Hymn of Prosperity. This is the special name given to the 58" Ha of the yasna.

aaz Or acts of worship. According to Nirangastan the hymn of Yenghe hatam is meant.
(Darmesteter).

aba For its translation, see first Karda of Sraosha yasht Hadokht.


--- Page 216 ---

200 KHORDEH AVESTA

Amesha Spentas - the Bountiful Immortals - *°protect'> upon!’ the seven
regions’* of the earth’. (24) Who (i.e. Srosh yazata) as the religious teacher”!
(i.e. Dastur) of the Religion moves about™ ruling-at-will?? upon” the
corporeal’ world”®.

Hormazd* the Holy**, Bahman*, Ardibehesht** Shehervar**®, Spand-
armad*’, Khordad**, Amardad *°(and) he who questions"! (regarding the faith)
of Ahura Mazda” (and) **the teacher*? of the path and mode of Ahura
Mazda* - (all these) were pleased*! by this”? Religion”.

(25) “Fra adha“ vaéibya*® ahubya*, vaéibya‘’? nd‘ ahubya”
nipayao™, ai5' Sraosha* ashya® huraodha™, ahecha* anghéush** yo*”
astvato® yascha® asti® manahyo". Pairi® dravatat® mahrakat™, pairi®
dravatat® aéshmat”, pairi® dravaitibyo® haénebyd”, yao’ us”
khrirem” drafshem™ gerewanan™, aéshmahe” paro” draomebyd”,
yao” aéshmo* duzdao*! dravayat”, mat® vidataot™ daévo-datat®*. (26)
Adha® no*’ tiim** Sraosha® ashya” huraodha®!, zavare’ dayao”
hitaéibyo™ dravatatem® tanubyd”, pouru-spakshtim” tbishayantam’,
paiti-jaitim’” |dushmainunim'™,  hathranivaitim' hamerethanam?
aurvathanam tbishyantam‘.

(25) O* beautiful and holy** Srosh® (yazata)! here“ during both* the
lives*® (and) during both*’ the worlds” thou must protect® us*.

Explanation:- (As to which are the two worlds is stated as under.)

This** world®* which*’ is corporeal and (the yonder world) which® is
spiritual®’ (thou mayest protect us there)

Explanation:- ( From what protection can be given is stated below.)

Against® the on-rushing® death, demon of wrath*’, and against® the
onrushing” **armies”, (O holy Srosh yazata! do thou protect us); who”! (i.e.
armies) have raised” aloft” the bloody” standard”. (Do thou protect us)
against” the onslaughts’ of Eshma demon’; caused to run® along with®
“death*. (26) O beautiful”, holy? Srosh (yazata)*! grant thou” strength”
unto our’? teams of horses soundness® of the bodies”, *%complete

subjugation” of the envious people”, smiting down” the enemies'” and

2

bb Originally this word avan is imperfect subjunctive third person plural; root av = Sanskrit av
= to protect. If we accept the reading “avain” according to Geldner, it means “come, descend;”
root ava-i.

abc Revelation of Ahura Mazda and Law of Ahura Mazda (Darmesteter).

2

bd Dr. Geldner takes para 25 in the verse-form of 12 lines and para 26 in the verse-form of 7
lines. Every line ends with full stop.

abe i.e. The wandering and plundering tribes of Turan and other countries (Darmesteter).

2

bf If we consider the word “vidataot” derived form “vidhotu”, it can mean (the demon called)
idhotu of the “demonic law”.

<

2

bg Good protection against our “tormentors” (Darmesteter).


--- Page 217 ---

SROSH YASHT VADI 201

strength to overthrow! the envious’, co-fighting” enemies’.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyd,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nO jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yo
ashahe apandtemd, yd ashahe jaghmishtemd. Vispa_ sravao
Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide,
varshtacha *""vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XI) (27) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem* verethrajanem‘
fradat-gaéthem® ashavanem® ashahe’ ratiim® yazamaide’. Yim"
chathwar6o" aurvantd” aurusha® raokhshna"™, fraderesra'’, spenta’®
vidhvaonghd"’, asaya’ mainivasangh6” vazenti?® sravaéna*! aesham”
safaonghd” zaranya* paiti?® thwarshtaonghd”. (28) Asyangha”’
aspatibya**, asyangha” vataéibya®, asyangha*! varatibya®” Asyangha*
maéghatibya™ asyangha® vayatibya®*, hvapataretaéibya*’, asyangha®*®
hvastayao” ainghimanayao”, (29) Yoi*! vispe” te*? apayeinti* yoi* ave**
paskat” vyeinti*, ndit” ave paskat*' afente”. Yoi vaéibya™
snaithizibya® frayatayeinti® vazemna*’ yim® vohim®?

Sraoshem® ashim*. Yatchit® ushastarire® hindvé™“ agéurvayeite®
yatchit® daoshataire” nighne’.

(27) We worship’ the righteous’ and the holy® Srosh Yazata the beautiful’,
victorious‘, bringing-prosperity to the world’ and Lord® of righteousness’.
Whom" four'! white’ steeds’? *brilliant'*, beautiful’, divine'®, wise!’ (and)
**ishadowless'® carry in the wagon”’ in the ““heavenly spaces'®. The hoofs” of
those (horses) are laden”! and gilt® with gold”. (28) They are swifter’” than
(other) horses”’, swifter” than winds”, rains”, clouds*, birds*® well-winged*’
(and) swifter*® than arrows well-aimed®. (29) They (horses) “can
overtake* all” those*? who go in pursuit of them. The pursuers can never*?
overtake*’ those (horses). Who® (horses) speed on* (while) carrying®’ in the
chariot®’ the good® holy*' (Sraosha yazata) (when he) takes his course® in

abh For its translation see 1“ karda of Sraosha yasht Hadokht.
abi The meaning of “‘aurusha” is also “crimson”. See Tir yashta, 1 Kardah.

abj i.e. (Steeds) who do not cast any shadow; a=not; saya=Persian sayeh=shadow. Dr. Mills tak-

ing the word as “Asava” translates it as “swift”.
abk Or moving in accord with the divine will (mainyava + vasangha)

abl i.e. the speed of the horses of the holy Sraosha yazata as mentioned in this paragraph is
swifter then wind, bird, arrow, etc.


--- Page 218 ---

202 KHORDEH AVESTA

the eastern-most® Hind“ and *™alights down® in the West”, (i.e. starting
from the Keshvar-region called Savahi he goes to the Keshvar-region called
Arezahi.)

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama veretharaghnacha, ahe
yasna yazatanadm tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim
zaothrabyd, Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha sanghem
huraodhem. Acha nd jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyo.
Sraoshem ashim yazamaide; ratiim berezantem yazamaide, yim
Ahurem Mazdam, yo ashahe apandtemd, yo ashahe jagmishtemd. Vispa
sravao Zarathushtri yazamaide. Vispacha_ hvarshta_ shyaothna
yazamaide, varshtacha *"vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XII) (30) Sraoshem! ashim? huraodhem’ verethrajanem‘
fradat-gaéthem* ashavanem’® ashahe’ ratim® Yazamaide’. YO!" berezo",
berezi-yasto’, Mazdao" daman"™ nishanghasti'’. (31) Y6'* athritim”
hamahe’® ayan”, hamayaéo” va?! khshapd”, imat* karshvare™ avazaiti*
yat® khvanirathem”?’ bamim’  snaithish? zastaya*® drazemno*',
bardithrd-taézem”, hva-vaéghem* kameredhe™ paiti** daévanam” (32)
snathai*’ angrahe mainyéush*® drayatod*’, snathai*” aéshmahe*! khravi-
draosh”, snathai*® mazainyanam“ daévanam*, snathai*’ vispanam”
daévanam*,

(30) We worship® the righteous” and holy® Srosh yazata, the beautiful’,
victorious‘, bringing-prosperity to the world’, and Lord*® of Righteousness’.
(He) Who”? is tall (of form'’) sits'® among creations’? of Ahura Mazda". (31-
32) Who'® comes down’’ thrice’? every'® day!’ and night to this”? region**
which” is the shining’ *°Khvaniratha?’, holding*' in (his) hands*’ the
sharpened weapon” capable of cutting’ (and) sufficiently smiting® the
skulls** of the demon*’, in order to strike*” the wicked? Angra Mainyu*,, in
order to strike*® the Eshma demon*! - the demon of wrath*’ - of terrible
weapon”, in order to strike*? the demons* of Mazandaran and in order to
strike® all*’ the demons®.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, anghe ama verethraghnacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyo,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sangehm huraodhem. Acha

abm Sraosha yazata starts from the river in the East and alights at the river in the West
(Darmesteter). The river in the East is Indus and the river in the West is Tigris.

abn For its translation see 1“ Karda of Srosh yasht Hadokht.

abo For the explanation of the word “Khvaniratha”, see note given to Khorshed Nyayesh para.
13.


--- Page 219 ---

SROSH YASHT VADI 203

nd jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
Yazamaide; ratim berezantem Yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam. yo
ashahe apanOdtem6d, yo ashahe jaghmishtem6. Vispa sravao zarathushtri
yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide, varshtacha
*»Pvareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XII) (33) Sraoshem! ashim’? huraodhem’ verethrajanem‘*
fradat-gaéthem*® ashavanem® ashahe’ ratim® yazamaide’. Idhatcha”,
ainidhathcea", idhatcha’ vishpamcha” aipi'* imam'*> zam", vispao'®
Sraoshahe"™ ashyehe” takhmahe” tanu-manthrahe”', takhmahe” ham-
varetivato* bazush-aojangho™,  rathaéshtao* kamaredhd-jan6d”*
daévanam?’. Vanatd vanaitish vanaitivat6, ashaond vanatd vanaitish
vanaintimcha uparatatem yazamaide, yamcha Sraoshahe ashyehe,
yamcha Arshtdish yazatahe. Vispa nmana Sraoshdpata yazamaide,
yenghadha Sraosho ashy6 frayd, fritd, paiti-zantd; nacha ashava, frayd-
humat6 frayd-hakht6 frayd-hvarshtd.""

(33) We worship °the righteous* and holy® Srosh' yazata, the beautiful’,
victorious‘, bringing-prosperity to the world’, and Lord*® of Righteousness’.
Here" or at any other place'', over'* this'® entire’? earth'®, (we extol) all the
deeds and victories'’ of Srosh'* yazata the holy’? the word-incarnate”',
powerful”, protector, mighty armed™ warrior”, and the cleaver of skulls*®
of the demons?’.

Ahe raya khvarengnghacha anghe ama verethraghanacha, ahe yasna
yazatanam tem yazai surunvata yasna; Sraoshem ashim zaothrabyo,
Ashimcha Vanguhim berezaitim, Nairimcha Sanghem huraodhem. Acha
nO jamyat avanghe verethrajao Sraoshd ashyd. Sraoshem ashim
yazamaide; ratim berezantem yazamaide, yim Ahurem Mazdam, yo
ashahe apanOdtemo, yo ashahe jaghmishtem6. Vispa sravao zarathushtri
yazamaide. Vispacha hvarshta shyaothna yazamaide, varshtacha
“'vareshyamnacha.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Sarosh asho, tagi, tan-farman, shekaft-zin, zin-
avazar, salare damane Ahura Mazda berasad; aedin bad. (Recite aloud)
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.
abp For its translation, see 1 Karda of Srosh Yasht Hadokht.
abq For the translation of this paragraph see Karda 5 of Srosh Yasht Hadokht.
abr For its translation, see kardah 1 of Srosh Yasht Hadokht.


--- Page 220 ---

204 KHORDEH AVESTA

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami, Sraoshahe
ashyehe, takhmahe, tanu-manthrahe, darshi-draosh, ahiiryehe. Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ahmai raéshcha; Hazangrem; jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubfarak (falan) Mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan), namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush, haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje khoreh awazayad Sarosh asho tagi, tan-farman, shekaft-zin
zin-awazar, salare damane Ahura Mazda berasad amavand pirozgar,
amavandih pirozgarl. Dad din beh Mazdayasnan, aAgahi_ ravai
goafarangant bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man 4no Avayad
shudan, man 4no Avayad shudan, man 4no Avayad shudan. Ashaone
Ashem vohu 1.

(Recite facing the South:) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarathushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sira Andhite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

Sraoshem ashim huraodhem  verethrajanem  fradat-gaethem
ashavanem ashahe ratim yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 1.

Sraosh asho, tagi, tan-farman, shekaft-zm, zin-awazar, salare
damane Ahura Mazda berasad. Ashem Vohi. 1.

NIRANG OF SROSH YASHT VADI

(This Nirang should be recited three times after the recitation of Srosh
Yasht Vadi.)

Gorje' Khoreh? awazayad * Sarosh‘ asho*, tagi®, pirozgar’ bad®,

J y

dastagire ravan’, hama” tan" pasban” ashoan”® asho' negehdar'’; roz'®

mah” o shaban'*, hame!” Iranian’, 07! paoiry6-dakeshin” gehan”
’ ’ y

daman”, behedinan, taziane bastekushtian”, Zarathushtian”’ nikain”® 0”

pakane® haft keshvar zamin*', Sarosh yazad* panah* bad™. Ashaone

Ashem Vohi 1. (Recite three times)

May the splendour’ and glory’ of the holy* Srosh (yazad) increase*!
(And) may he be® strong®, (and) victorious’! (Srosh yazad is) the helper of
the souls’, protector’? of all'® men'' and the pious’* guardian’’ of righteous
men'*; may there be* protection®* of Srosh yazad* during day’® and night'®
and months’’ (i.e. forever): unto all’® the Iranians”® of the creatures™ of the
world’, unto the Poryodakeshas”, unto the faithful”, unto the Arabs girding


--- Page 221 ---

NIRANG OF SROSH YASHT VADI 205

the sacred thread”® (i.e. those Arabs who have accepted the Zoroastrian
Religion), unto the Zoroastrians’’, and unto good** and holy men* of the
seven regions of the earth*!!

FARVARDIN YASHT
Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdin Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh
awazayad; Ardafravash berasad.””

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tant
ravani geti mindani, okhe avakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom.

Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush; haith-
yavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi ashem. Ashem Vohi 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévé Ahura-tkaésho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha, ashaundam fravashinam
ughranam aiwi-thuranam paoiryo-tkaeshanam fravashinam nabanaz-
dishtanam fravashinam, khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaoth-
raicha frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota fra-me mrite, atha
ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti.

(Kardah 1) (1) Mraot! Ahur6é Mazdad’ Spitamai? Zarathushtrai‘,
aéva* te’ zavare’ aojascha® khvaren6? avascha” rafnascha" framrava”,
erezvo'’ Spitama™, yat ashaonam* fravashinam” ughranam” aiwithi-
ranam'®, yatha” me” jasen?! avanghe”, yatha® me baren® upastam”,
ughrao”’ ashaonam” fravashayo”.

(2) Aongham® raya?! khvarenanghacha®, vidharaém™ Zarathush-
tra* aom*® asmanem”, yo°*’ uscha* raokhshn6” fraderesr6”, yo"! imam”
zam*® acha“ pairicha* bavava“, Manayen ahe yatha”’ vish*, aem®” yo"
hishtaite*' mainyu-stato* handrakhtd* diraékarand™, ayanghdo*
kehrpa® khvaénahe* raochahino* avi thrishva™.

(3) Yim*' Mazdao” vaste® vanghanem™ stehrpaésanghem® mainyu-
tashtem®, hachimno*” Mithro® Rashnucha® Armaiticha” Spentaya”,
yahmai” noit? chahmai”’ naémanam” karana” pairi-vaénbithe”.

(1) (The Creator) Ahura Mazda’ spoke! unto Spitaman? Zarathushtra*: O
true? (truthful) Spitaman'* (Zarathushtra)! °*"I proclaim” thee® ("in this
way’) the vigour’, strength’, glory’, help'® and joy'’ of the powerful!’ (and)
abs i.e. May the holy Fravashis come (to my help)!

abt Considering that the termination mi of the present tense first person singular parasmaipada is
dropped.


--- Page 222 ---

206 KHORDEH AVESTA

triumphant'* Fravashis'® of the righteous (people'*); just as’? the powerful”

Fravashis” of the righteous (people)** come”! to my” help” (and) just as”
(they) (gave)** support*® unto me”.

(2) On account of the brightness*’ and glory” of those (Fravashis)*°, O
Zarathushtra™! I maintain® this*> sky** which*’ (is) *“lofty**, shining®? (and)
beautiful” and which"! (i.e. sky) encompasses**“* this” earth® and around*.
(That sky) (is) like*’ “a palace®.

Explanation:- (The description of the sky resembling a palace is stated
below).

Which® is*! on® this **earth® *’built up by the Spiritual (yazatas)”,
“firmly established, with ends that lie afar, ““made of shining™®
diamonds***”.

(3) Which (i.e. the sky)*! *°associated with’ Meher yazata®, Rashna
yazata® and Spenta Armaiti””!, Ahura Mazda has put on® as a star-
bedecked® garment™ woven by the Spiritual (yazatas)®. Its two ends’

cannot be perceived” by any person.

(4) Aongham raya khvarenanghacha, vidharaém Zarathushtra
*dAredvim Siram Andhitam, perethu-frakam, baéshazyam, vidaévam,
Ahur6-tkaésham, yesnyam anguhe astvaite, vahmyd4m anguhe astvaite.
Adhi-fradhanam ashaonim, vathwoé-fradhanam ashaonim, gaétho-
fradhanam ashaonim, shaéto-fradhanam ashaonim, danghu-fradhanam
ashaonim.

abu e.g. Kva aéva, i.e. in what way? In this way (see Vendidad III.40); Sanskrit eva = in this
way, or adverb indicating “indeed verily”. Sanskrit eva.

99 «6.

abv The original meaning as adverb is “above”, “up there”.

abw Darmesteter. “Woven cloth” derived from Sanskrit root ve “to weave” (Harlez). Its ordinary
meaning is “bird”.

abx Darmesteter. Original meaning “in the three-thirds”. In the matter of dimensions this earth is
stated to be divided in seven regions, according to Avesta; besides this, the three equal parts of
thickness or density of the earth are mentioned. First one-third is the surface of the earth; second
one-third is the portion of the interior of the surface of the earth; the third one-third is the low -
est, i.e. bottom portion. The significance of the word thrishva occuring in this para seems to be
the first one-third, i.e. the surface portion.

aby Root std = Sanskrit sthd = to be, to exist, to remain.

abz Root han-derez = to lighten, to bind.

56 5899

aca Darmesteter. Original meaning “made” of pure” iron

acb Original meaning “following” (Ahura Mazda). Its significance seems to be that the above
mentioned three yazatas were also associated with this task.

ace Pari-vaéndithe - potential mood third person dual parasmaipada.

acd Meaning: On account of the brilliance and glory of those (Fravashis) I maintain the Aredvi
Sura, the undefiled. For the translation of the remaining portion, see first five paragraphs of
Avan yasht.


--- Page 223 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 207

(5) Ya vispanam arshnam khshudhrao yaozdadhiiti. Ya vispanam
hairishindm zathai garewan yaozdadhiaiti. YA vispao  hairishish
huzamito dadhaiti. Ya vispanaim hiairishinam daitim rathwim paéma
ava-baraiti.

(6) Masitam dirat frasritam; ya asti avavaiti masd, yatha vispao
im4o 4po yao zema paiti fratachinti, ya amavaiti fratachaiti. Hukairyat
hacha barezanghat avi zrayO Vouru-kashem.

(7) Yaozenti vispe karand zraya Vouru-Kashaya, 4 vispO maidhyod
yaozaiti. Yat hish avi fratachaiti; yat hish avi frazgaraiti Aredvi Sara
Anahita. Yenghe hazangrem vairyanaim, hazangrem apaghzaranam
kaschitcha aésham vairyanam kaschitcha aéshiam apaghzaranam,
chathvaresatem ayarebaranam hvaspai naire baremnai.*”

(8) Anghaoscha me aévanghao apo apaghzard vijasaiti, vispaish avi
karshvan yais hapta. Anghaoscha me aévanghao 4pd hamatha ava-
baraiti haminemcha zayanemcha. Ha me 4pd yaozdadhaiti, ha arshnam
khshudrao, ha khshathrinam garewan, ha khshathrinam paéma.

(9) Aongham! raya? khvarenanghacha’, vidharaém‘ Zarathushtra®
zam¢ perethwim’ Ahuradhatam’, yam’ masimcha” pathanamcha", ya”
barethri' paraosh" srirahe'’, ya’ vispem'’ ahim' astvantem” baraiti®,
jumcha”' tristemcha” garayascha™® yodi* berezantd* pouru-vastra-
ongho” afento”’.

(9) On account of the brilliance? and glory’? of those (Fravashis)', O
Zarathushtra! I maintain‘ (this) wide’, large’? (and) broad" earth® created by
Ahura Mazda‘; which” (is) the mother’? of (all) good’* things’; (and) bears
on herself*° (or maintains”) (the people) of the entire’’ corporeal’ world’® -
the living?’ as well as the dead” - and lofty mountains, rich in pastures”®
“fertile with water?’

(10) Yenghao”* paiti?? thraotd-stachd* 4pd*! tachinti?? navayao*;
yenghao™ paiti* pourusaredhao* zemadha*’ uzukhshyeinti* urvarao”,
thrathrai® pasvao*' virayao”, thrathrai*® Airyanam* dakhyunam*,
thrathrai* géush” panchd-hyayao*, avanghe”® naram™ ashaonam*'.

(10) Upon” which” (earth) waters*’ of running stream*® (and) river®
flow”; upon*®* which™ plants of many kinds** grow from the ground*’, for
the nourishment” of both cattle*! and men*” of the Iranian** countries*,
*five kinds** of animals*’ (and) for the help” of righteous*! men*.

ace For the translation of paras 4-8 the beginning portion of Aredvi Sura Nyayesh. For compar -
ison, see Avan yasht, first Five paragraphs.

acf Original meaning “of the beautiful prosperity or abundance”.

acg As regards five kinds of animals there is a reference in the first paragraph of the First
Kardah of Vispered: (1) those living in waters. (2) those living under the ground. (3) the flying
ones or winged ones, (4) animals that wander wild at large, and (5) the grazing ones.


--- Page 224 ---

208 KHORDEH AVESTA

(11) Aongham® raya® khvarenanghacha™, vidharaém*> Zarathush-
tra azem*’ barethrishva®* puthre’ paiti-verete® aparairithinto“
adatat” vidhataot®, vyahva™* urvatchaém® asticha® gaonacha”,
drevdacha® uruthwascha”®, paidhyaoscha”, fravakhshascha”.

(12) Yeidhi” zi me” nodit”® daidhit” upastam” ughrao” ashaunam”
fravashayo*, ndit*! me idha® aonghatem* pasvira*, ya** sto*’
saredhanam® vahishta® Drujd” aogare’!, drujo” khshathrem™, drujo”
astvao” anghush” aonghat””.

(13) Ni® antare” zim! asmanemcha!, drujao? manivao*® hazdyat';
nP antare’ zim’ asmanemcha’, drujao? manivao!’ vaonyat"; noit”
paschaéta’ vano' vantai'’ upadayat'® angrod mainyush” spentai
mainyave'®,

(11) (The Creator Ahura Mazda says): On account of the lustre® and
glory™ of those (Fravashis)* I°’ maintain®* children*’ in (the wombs of) the
mothers*’, saved® and undying’ from the assaults’ of (the demon)
Vidhotu®. (Besides)*™ in it (i.e. in the wombs of the mothers) I *“form® the
bones”, the model”, “/sinew®, intestines”, feet” and genital organs”!.

(12) For? if” the powerful’ Fravashis® of the righteous people”, would
not” have given” help” unto Me”, animals and men® of Mine®? who* *“are
the best®® of the species** would not*! have “'subsisted** here® (i.e. in this
world); (but instead there would have been the strength of the Druj, the
dominion of the Druj and the corporeal world of the Druj.)

(13) Between” the earth’? and the sky’ (the Dominion) of the Druj’ and
(the evil) spirits’ *“would continue”, between’ the earth’ and the sky® (the
power) of the Druj’ and (the evil) spirits’? would succeed''; and never”
afterwards’? would Angra Mainyu'’ subdue’® the victorious’* and loving’
Spenta Mainyu'®.

(14) Aongham” raya” khvarenanghacha”!, apd” tachinti?? fratat-
charetd*4, khao** paiti?® afrazyamnao”’; aongham” raya” khvarenang-

ach The exact meaning of vydhva has not been ascertained. It seems to be the locative plural of
the word vyd (see yasna Ha 48.7). Here this word can perhaps be vi + ahva; vi (prefix); dhva =
demonstrative pronoun locative plural feminine; meaning “in them”.

aci Or to flourish; to nourish; to rear.
acj Based upon Bundahishn; “skin” (Darmesteter).
ack Sto (= Sanskrit stah) - present tense third person dual parasmaipada; root ah.

acl Aonghdtem - Perfect Tense subjunctive third person dual parasmaipada (Justi); donghdt -
Perfect tense subjunctive third person singular parasmaipada; root ah = Sanskrit as.

acm Darmesteter. Drujao manivao - dvandva compound genitive dual; hazdydt - its meaning is
also “would snatch away, would seize away”; from the same root, words hazo, hazasnam are de-
rived. The first ni - prefix occurring in this para should be taken with hazdyat and the second ni
with the word vaonydt.


--- Page 225 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 209

hacha*’, zemadha*! uzukhshyeinti? urvarao*, khao™ paiti*> afrazyam-
nao*; aongham*’ raya** khvarenanghacha”; vato*’ vaonti*! dunmo-
fruto”’, khao* paiti* afrazyamnao*.

(15) Aongham*® raya‘*’ khvarenanghacha*, hairishish” puthre*
verenvainti"; aAongham® raya® khvarenanghacha™, huzamitd* ziza-
nenti®; Zongham*’ raya*® khvarenanghacha®, yat® bavainti®™ hachat-
puthrao®.

(16) Aongham® raya“ khvarenanghacha®, us® na” zayeiti®
vyakhanod® vyakhmoéhu” gishayat-ukhdho”, yo” bavaiti khratu-
kato“; yd’ naidyaonghd”, gaotemahe” pard-yao” parshtodit” avaiti®.
Aongham* raya® khvarenanghacha*®, hvare* ava** patha* aéiti*’;
aongham® raya® khvarenanghacha”, mao*! ava” patha”® aéiti™;
aongham” raya” khvarenanghacha” stara® ava” patha’™ yeinti'.

(14) On account of the lustre”? and glory”! of those (Fravashis)’’ the
running and flowing™ waters” flow™ towards’ inexhaustible”’ springs”; on
account of their’ lustre’? and glory*® the plants* *"“grow from the earth?!
through*> inexhaustible*® springs**; on account of their*’ lustre*® and glory
the wind* driving down the clouds*” blow‘! towards“ the inexhaustible*
springs®.

(15) On account of the lustre*’ and glory* of those (Fravashis)** the
bearing mothers *“°become pregnant; on account of their® lustre*’ and glory™
(the bearing mothers) “give birth to children®® with ease**; on account of
their*’ lustre** and glory® (the bearing mothers) become” rich in children”.

(16) On account of the lustre*’ and glory*® of those (Fravashis)** *“the
head of an assembly and *“the interpreter of religious verses”! in assemblies”
is born® with greatness®; who” is **the lover of wisdom”; (and) who” *“has
come out* victorious® from the controversy” (about the religion with
Nodhas, (the son) of “"Gaotema. On account of their*! lustre’ and glory® the

acn i.e. from under the ground, freshness and wetness ever continue to get; the plants grow
thereby.

aco Original meaning is: females bringing forth offspring” keep”! pregnancy”.
acp Original meaning is: they give birth® with easy delivery”

acq i.e. the chairman, the conductor of the assembly.

acr Original meaning: the interpreter of sacred verses of the religion; preacher.
acs Compare Khratu-chinangho; see Vendidad fargard IV, 44" paragraph.

act Original meaning: “Comes proceeding from the arguments or becoming victorious” (pard-
yao).

acu Dastur Darab. Avesta gaotema can be the exact Sanskrit equivalent Gotama. According to
the English booklet published in the year 1898 A.D. entitled, The Reference to Gaotema in the
Avesta, by Shams-ul-Ulema Dastur Darab: There were many Gotama’s; of them two persons at-
tract our attention a good deal: 1. Rushi Gaotama; 2. Gotama Buddha, (the Founder of


--- Page 226 ---

210 KHORDEH AVESTA

Sun®™, the Moon”, and the stars”® go' towards” (their own) path’.

(17) Tao? ughrahu’ peshanahu‘’ upastam® henti® dahishtao’, yao*
fravashayo? ashaonam"™; tao" fravashayd'’* ashaonam' aojishtao™
henti'> Spitama’’, yao” paoiryanam”™ tkaéshanam”, yao”? va”! naram”
azatanam™ frashd-charethram™ saoshyantam”. Aat”® anyaésham”’
fravashayo* jvanam” naram*” ashaonadm*! aojyehish” Zarathushtra®,
yatha™ iristanam*® Spitama”.

(18) Aat3’ yo%® na hish” huberetao*! barat? jva®, ashaonam“
fravashayo* sasta*® dainghéush” hamo-khshathro*, ho” anghaiti*
zazushtemo*! khshayd* kaschit* mashyanama™; yd vohu-beretam®
baraite’’ Mithrem® yim® vouru-gaoyaoitim”, Arshtatemcha® fradat-
gaétham® varedat-gaetham®.

(19) Itha™ te® zavare® aojascha®’ khvarend® avascha® rafnascha”
framraomi”', erezvo” Spitama™, yat” ashaonam”™ fravashinam”
ughranam” aiwithiranam”; yatha” me* jasen*! avanghe®, yatha® me*
baren® upastam® ughrao*’ ashaonam*® fravashayo”.

(17) In fearful> battles* the fravashis° of the righteous (people)'° ““are® the
wisest’ for help*. O Spitaman'® (Zarathushtra)! Those!’ which” (are) the
fravashis” of the righteous’? Poryotkaeshas'*"® or?! of men” yet unborn’ or
of the Saoshyants?> who prepare the world for renovation™ are’> most
powerful’ (or most efficacious'*). Moreover’®, amongst other fravashis’’, the
fravashis* of the living” righteous*’ men*, O Spitaman*® Zarathushtra**!
(are) more powerful than** (those) of the dead.

(18) If *“the ruler of any country with full power might carry” good
presents"! for *““these*’ fravashis of the righteous (people) whilst living*’, he”
becomes” a most *“’powerful*! ruler’? amongst men™. (In the same way) (the
king) who* carries*’ good gift** to Meher yazad, the Lord of wide pastures
and to Ashtad yazad°! the increaser of the world and the furtherer of the
world® (becomes the powerful ruler as well).

(19) O righteous” Spitaman’ (Zarathushtra)! about the vigour®,

Buddhism). The first Gotama was the fifth Rushi. References about this Rushi Gotama as well
as his son Nodhasare from Rigveda. Moreover, in 1887 A.D., Rev. Windischmann stated that the
word ndidydongho which is associated with Gaotemahe is proper name. From this Dastur Darab
concludes that “Naidyaongha Gaotema” of Avesta is the same as “Gaotama Nodhas” of the Rig
Veda. Besides Professor Max Muller fixes the age of Rushis to 1500 B.C.; from this the age of
the Farvardin yasht can also be estimated. Also the meaning of ndidydongh becomes “weaker,
more needy” and “treated with contempt” (see yasna Ha 34.8, Ha 57.10.)

acv i.e. “Grant help wherever deserving; in other words, exercise perfect wisdom in granting
help; are most helpful” (Darmesteter).

acw Originally, “a person” who* (is) the ruler with full power'® of the country*”.
acx Pronoun hish can be applied to Fravashayo - fravashis as well as to huveretdao (gifts).

acy Root zu = Sanskrit ju = to be strong; original form zazvangh + tema.


--- Page 227 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 211

|” t

strength’, glory®, ““help® and joy” of the powerful” (and) triumphan
fravashis” of the righteous (people)”, I ““proclaim” to thee® thus® (i.e. as
stated above) (and) just as” (those) powerful®’ fravashis® of the righteous
(people)** came up*' to my® help® (and) just as* they *°granted** me“
authority*.

(Kardah II) (20) Mraot'! Ahurd Mazda@? Spitamai? Zarathushtrai‘,
aatS yase’-thwa’ aétahmi® anghvod’ yat'® astvainti"', Spitama”
Zarathushtra’, patham™ jasaiti!’ vithwaéso'® bodiwranam”
duzitanamcha™ thwaynguhatam” Zarathushtra™, yezicha”! thwaéshao”
tanvo*, atha™“ ima? vach6d* dreiyaydish?’, atha?® ima” vacho*"
framruyao* varethraghnish® Zarathushtra®.

(21) Ashaunam*™ vanguhish* sirao* spentao*”’ fravashayo** staomi”
zbayemi*” ufyemi*'. Yazamaide* mnmanydo* visyao“ zantumao*
dakhyumao* Zarathushtrdtemao”’. Haitish** hatam”,  haitish*
aonghusham*', haitish* bishyantam™ ashaonam™, vispao™* vispanam*°
dakhyunam”, zévishtayao® zévishtyanam® dakhyunam”.

(20) Ahura Mazda’ spoke! unto Spitaman? Zarathushtra*: O Spitaman’
Zarathushtra'*! if? in this* corporeal'' world? the terror'® of the dangerous”,
zigzag'® and terrible’? paths'* comes’* upon thee’, and if*', O Zarathushtra”®!
(there be) fear” of (thy) body* (i.e. if thou hast fear of coming upon any
injury), then recite thou?’ *“these*> sacred verses” (of Avesta mentioned
below), Zarathushtra*! Do thou recite aloud*! these” victorious” (i.e.
obstacles removing) sacred verses* (of Avesta).

(21) I praise*’, I remember“? (or I invoke*’) the excellent*’, heroic*® and
beneficent*’ Fravashis** of the righteous** (people)** and sing (their) glory.
We worship” (those Fravashis) belonging to the house‘, to the clan“, to the
town* to the country** (and) belonging to the highest priest*’. We worship”
the existing (Fravashis)*° of the righteous (men)™ that have been*', and that
will be hereafter. We worship” (the Fravashis**) of (the people of) all
countries*’ (and) the (Fravashis*’) of (the people of) friendly countries”.

(22) Yao°! asmanem® vidharayen™, yao“ apem® vidharayen™, yao”
zam® vidharayen®, yao” gam’! vidharayen”, yao” barethrishva”™
puthre’ vidharayen” paiti-verete” apara-irithento” adatat” vidhataot®.
Vyahva*! urvat-chayen® asticha® gaonacha™ drevdacha® uruthwascha*
paidhyaoscha*’ fravakhshascha*,

acz i.e. As regards help and joy derived from them.

ada Present tense used in the sense of the Past tense; see my Avesta Grammar, paragraph 637.

8409

adb Originally, “brought* authority” for me

adc i.e. Avestan sacred verses from para 21 up to the end of para 25. By reciting the sacred
verses occurring in these paragraphs courage comes to the reciter, having got rid of fear and
dread of the road. For comparison, see Srosh yasht Hadokht, Kardah 1, paras 4-7.


--- Page 228 ---

212 KHORDEH AVESTA

(23) Yao ash-beret6”, yao*! ughraretd”, yao” hvaretd™“, yao
vazareto™®, yao” takhmaretd’, yao” zaoyareto'; yao' zaoyao’
vanghuthwaéshu’, yao* zaoyao* verethraghnyaéshu’; yao’ zaoyao®
peshanahuw?’.

(22) Who"! (i.e. Fravashis) maintain® the sky”, water®, the earth®’, the
cattle”, (and) children” in the wombs of the mothers”, saved” and
“4yndying”® from the assaults” of (the demon) Vidhotu®®. (Besides, those
Fravashis) “““form® the bones**, the model*, sinew**, intestines**, feet’’ and
the genital organs*® (of the children).

(23) Who® (i.e. Fravashis) are well-supporting”, rushing-forth-steadily”,
rushing on one’s self, rushing forth vigorously with courage’’, who”
(are) rushing forth when invoked’, and (are) worthy of invocation? in
goodness? (i.e. in matters of goodness); who‘ (are) worthy of invocation’ in
victories®, (are) worthy of invocation’ in battles’.

(24) Yao dathrish" verethrem” zbayante’, dathrish“ ayaptem'
chakushe’’®, dathrish’” bantai'® drvatatem”, dathrish?? ahmai?! vohi
khvaren6”’, yo hish** yazano kukhshnvano”’ zbayeiti?® bard-zaothro”
ashava*".

(25) Yao*! avadha” para® fraoirisishtao™, yathra* nar6°*° ashavano”’
ashem** henti*? zarazdatema”, yathracha‘' mazishtao” fréretao*
ad¢(yathracha“ khshnito* ashava“| yathracha”’ atbishtd“ ashava”.

(24) Who’ (i.e. Fravashis) (are) the givers'' of victory’ to the
“hinvoker'’, bestowers'* of boon!’ to (their) lover'®, (and) giver!” of health”
to the *““sick man. (Besides they are) the bestowers”’ of good” glory” unto
him”! who* (is) their?? worshipper*®, propitiator’’, invoker*’, offerer of
libations”? (and) holy”.

(25) *“'The Fravashis (of the righteous people) (are) visiting most™ (or
incline most) to that side** where the righteous*” men* are*® *“most devoted”

add For comparison see yasna Ha 23, para 1.
ade For comparison see para 11 of the same yasht.

adf Or “on-rushing”; present participle feminine first person plural; original form ughra + aret;
aret = going (present participle); root ere = Sanskrit ar = to go. Similarly, it should be con-
sidered in the case of words following it (hvdret0, vazareto, takhmareto, zaoyareto).

adg In the original text this sentence is left out (see Prof. Geldner Avesta, I, Stuttgart, 1889,
page 173, note 4).

adh Present participle dative singular masculine; root zba = Sanskrit hva, hve = to invoke, to call
on for assistance, to praise, to remember.

adi Professors Harlez and Darmesteter.

adj The word yao (who) at the beginning of paragraphs 22-25 applies to “ashaunam fravashay6”
occurring in para 21.

adk Original meaning dedicators, i.e. devoted to righteousness.


--- Page 229 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 213

to righteousness**, where*! there are*®? “most” revered* (men), *“"[where“

the righteous** (man) (becomes) satisfied**] (i.e. pleased) and where*’ the
righteous” (man) (is) ““pleased**.

(Kardah IID) (26) Ashaunam! vanguhish? sido’ spentao* fravashayo*
yazamaide’. Yao’ aojishtao® vazentam’, renjishtao' fravazemnanam",
afrakavastemao’ apa-srayamnanam' anvarshtavastemao™ fraschin-
bananam", apairi-vastemao’ snaithishamcha” varethanamcha'’; yao”
afraourvisvat” kerenvainti”' irem” yahmya” jasenti**.

(27) Tao* vanguhish”, tao?’ vahishtao** yazamaide”, yao
ashaunam*! vanguhish® sirdo* spentaéo* fravashayo**. Tao*® zi”
staretaéshu** baresmoéhu® zaoy4o*’, tao*! verethraghnyaeshu”, tao*
peshanahu“, tao* idha* yat* nard* takhma” _peretente*’
verethraghnyaéshu".

(26) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)'; who’ (are) the strongest’ of those that drive in a carriage,
most agile'? of those marching forwards", “least noisy of the retreating
ones’, “most powerful of the supporters'®, most invincible!’ of the
possessor of offensive weapons'’ and of the defensive weapons’.
(Moreover) in whatever place*’ they’? go™ they never let go”' happiness (or
“'sood fortune”) (from that place).

(27) We worship” the excellent®”, heroic*? (and) beneficent** Fravashis*
of the righteous (people)*! who* (are) good” and the best”’. They (are)
indeed*’ worthy to be invoked* on the spread out** baresman*? (i.e. in the
functions of Yazishna, Vendidad, etc., pertaining to purifying priests), in the
matters of victoriousness”, in battles“ and there*® (where) the gallant”
heroes* fight® *“for (gaining) victory*'.

(28) Tao” Mazdao* zbayat™ avanghe*, avanghecha*® ashno°’
vididhara® apascha® zemascha® urvarayaoscha". Yat” Spentd
Mainyush® vidharayat™ asmanem® yat apem yat zim” yat gam® yat
urvaram® yat berethrishva” puthre”! vidharay at” paiti-verete” apara-
irithentd“, adatat’ vidhataot”. Vyahva” urvat-chayat® asticha”

adl Or pious - religious men (see yasna Ha 8 para 2); very charitable (Darmesteter).
adm In the original text this sentence is left out (see note above.)
adn Original meaning “untormented”, i.e. not ill-treated. (See yasna Ha 62-9).

ado “Most powerful in drawing (the carriage); the lightest amongst the occupants in the car-
riage” (Darmesteter).

adp Professor Harlez. The meaning of this word has not been fixed with certainty.
adq Original meanings “effective, efficacious, bearable”.
adr Professor Darmesteter.

ads Locative singular used in the sense of dative singular (vide yasht X.82).


--- Page 230 ---

214 KHORDEH AVESTA

gaonacha®™ drevdacha* uruthwascha®” paidhyaoscha® fravakhshascha*,

(29) Vidharayat® Spentd Mainyush®*, yao%”’ amavaitish**
tushnishadho® huddithrish” verezi-chashman6”! sraoithrish” dareghd-
rarodmano”; yao" berezaitish*’ berezyastao”, yao” huyaonao”®
perethuyaonao”, rav6-fraothmand'” dasathavaitish! frasrutao? upa-
darayen’ asmanem‘.

(28) (The Creator) Ahura Mazda® *“called** them* (i. e. the Fravashis)
for the assistance of the yonder *“sky*’, waters®’, the earth® and the
plants”. ““’Whereby” (i.e. by the assistance of the Fravashis)” the Spenta
Mainyu® maintains” the sky®, water®, the earth®’, the cattle®*, the plants
and children’! in the wombs of the mothers”, saved” and undying”, from the
assaults” of (the demon) Vidhotu”. (Besides, those Fravashis) *““’form” the
bones”, the model*, sinew*’, intestines, feet® and the genital organs™.

(29) Spenta Mainyu® maintains® the sky* (and) *“the Fravashis*’ *“assist
in maintaining it’.

Explanation:- (The detailed characteristics of Fravashis are now stated
below).

Who*’ (i.e. the Fravashis) are courageous®, sitting at ease*’, possessing
good eyes”, of effective glance®', ““having a keen sense of hearing”, giving
excessive joy”, exalted”, high-girded” having a good, spacious residence”,
wide-stepping'”’, health-giving' (and) renowned”. (They assist in maintaining
the sky).

(Kardah IV) (30) Ashaunam! vanguhish’ surao’ spentao* fravashad°
yazamaide’. Hush-hakhman9’ hvarezanao', dareghaéiby0°
hakhedraéiby6"; upa-shitée'' vahishtao'’? anazaretaéo’™ aéibyo"™
nerebyo; vanguhish’® yoi'’ vo'® vanghush”’; gufrao” diraésikao”!
baéshazyao” _frasriitao* vanat-peshando™“; ndit*® paurvao’
azarayeinte’’.

(30) We worship the good’, heroic’ (and) beneficent* Fravashis’ of the

adt In English used in the sense of “The Heaven above”.

adu In this sentence the meaning of the predicate vididhara (=supported, maintained) does not
suit the context. According to the opinion of Dr. Geldner, there does not seem any necessity of
this word.

adv This word (vat) is not in the instrumental singular, but it is in the accusative singular.
adw See paragraphs 11 and 22 of this yasht.
adx I have translated the word yao by “Fravashis” which stood for the noun fravashayo.

ady Original meaning “those who hear”. The feminine gender of Sraotar (= Sanskrit Srotru =
hearer, listener) became sraothri.

99 66

adz If we take the meaning of yaona as “help”, the word would mean “giving good help”, “giv-
ing sufficient help”.


--- Page 231 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 215

righteous (people)'. Who (i.e. the Fravashis) (are) possessed of good
friendship’; (and who are) ““benefiting? on account of their friendship'® for a
long time’; (they are) best!” **to live with'' (if) not offended’ by these"
men'’. (They are) *“good'® (for those) who’’ (are) good’? amongst you’®.
(Besides those Fravashis are) *“not obvious”, far-glancing”!, healing’, re-
nowned”* (and) winning in battle*; (they do **not harm’’ (anyone else)
first”®.

(Kardah V) (31) Ashaunam! vanguhish? siirao® spentao‘* fravashayo*
yazamaide’. Ughra-zaoshao’ tbishyanby6’, upairi-kairyao’ sévishtao',
yao" upairi’ hamarenadha’ aurvathanam"™ tbishyantam' ughrao’®
baziish” schindayeinti'®.

(31) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people )’. (Who, i.e. the Fravashis) (are) strong-willed against the
tormentors®, doing excessive work (and) most beneficent'®. (Moreover)
who" break to pieces’® strong’® arms'’ of the tormenting!> opponents”*.

(Kardah VI) (32) Ashaunam! vanguhish? siirao’ spentao‘ fravashayo*
yazamaide®; aredrao’ takhmao* aojanghuhaitish? anamathwao"
khvathravaitish" khvaparao” baéshazayao’, ashOdish'* baéshaza'
hachimnao", zem-frathangha” danu-drajangha" hvare-barezangha”.

(32) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)' (Who, the Fravashis are) the bestowers’, strong’,
powerful’, inconceivable’’, giving comfort and ease", self-supporting” (and)
healing’. (Moreover, who are) “‘bringing with them!’ the means’ of
righteousness“ as wide as the earth'’, as long as the river'’, and as exalted as
the sun’.

(Kardah VII) (33) Ashaunaim! vanguhish? siirao* spentao*
fravashayO> yazamaide®’. Yao’ takhmao®  ham-vareitivaitish?
arezyeintish’ khrvishyantish"  urvinaitish’; fraschindayeintish™
vispanam"™ tbaéshavatam’ tbaéshao'® daévanam’’ mashyanamcha’;
amaé-nijano’’ hamerethe” havai?! kamaicha” zaoshaicha”’.

(34) Yiizem™“ vanguhi’** nisrinaota” verethraghnemcha”’ Ahura-
dhatem” vanaintimcha” uparatatem*, abyd*! danghubyo” sévishtao™®,
yatha* vanguhish* anazaretao* khshnitao*’ ainitaéo* atbishtao”,

aea i.e. Fravashis are worthy of friendship and by keeping friendship with them continuously
numerous advantages are obtained.

aeb i.e. by remaining in their relation as a friend much benefit is arisen.

aec With the good the Fravashis do goodness.

aed Original meaning “mysterious”. The meaning of gufra is “deep” see yasht XIX.51).
aee i.e. They do not harm anyone without any reason.

aef For comparison, see Yasna Ha 60, paragraph 4.


--- Page 232 ---

216 KHORDEH AVESTA

yuzem” yesnyao*! vahmyao” vaso-yaonao* frachrathwe™.

(33) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people'). Who’ (are) strong’, protective, fighting (for the good
cause)'®, cruel (towards the wicked)!', “fobserving to a great distance’.
(Besides they are) the destroyers’? of the malice!’ of all’* the envious
persons'*, of the daevas'’ (and) of men'® and courageous'’’ smiters of the
enemies” according to their own”! wish” and will”.

(34) O ye good* (and) most beneficent* (Fravashis) when* you are
unoffended*, pleased’, unoppressed** (and) untormented* (by the Iranian
countries), you™ good (Fravashis) grant*® victory?’ created by Ahura
Mazda** and conquering” superiority*® unto those*’ countries”. You (who
are) worthy of worship*! (and) worthy of adoration? **move about“
*iexercising authority over the aerial space according to your will”.

(Kardah VIII) (35) Ashaunaim! vanguhish? sirao* spentao*
fravashayO*® yazamaide‘’; frasriitao’ vanat-peshanao*® avi-amao’ sparo-
dashtao" amuyumnao" razishtanam”; yao’? ava-zbayatd" avanghe®
vyascha"’ vyanascha” apatée'® zbayeiti’? vyas”, apa-gatée”! vyan6”.

(36) Yao avadha para fraoirisishtao, yathra nard ashavand ashem
henti zrazdatema, yathracha mazishtao freretao, *[yathracha khshnutd
ashava], yathracha atbishtd *““ashava.

(35) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)’. (Who are) renowned’, winning in battle’, courageous’,
shield-bearing! and *"firm'! amongst the most just!?. (Moreover) whom?
both the pursuer’® and “the pursued’’ *"invoke’* for help'*. The pursuer”’
“for catching'® (the pursued) and the **pursued’] for escaping”! (from the
pursuer) (invoke the Fravashis for help).

aeg Original form uru + vaénant; uru = wide; root vin = to see.
aeh fracharathwe - present tense second person plural atmanepada; root char = Sanskrit char.
aei In English, “space”. The meaning of vasd-yaondo can also be, “assisting at will”.

ae] This sentence is left out in the original text (see Prof. Geldner, Avesta I Stuttgart, 1889, page
175, 36, line 5.

aek For its translation, see para 25 of this yasht.

ael Original meaning “not moving” (root mu = to move), i.e. immovable in any way in the mat-
ter of justice.

aem Vyascha - present participle parasmaipada first person singular masculine; vydnascha -
present participle atmanepada; root vi = Sanskrit vi; vi + ant +s; vit ants.

aen Ava-zbayato - present tense third person dual parasmaipada; root zbdi. apatée - noun dative
singular; root up = to reach; ap + ati.

aeo This sentence is left out in the original text. See above.

aep apa-gatée - noun dative singular; apa-gati = running away; apa = away; root gam; gam+ti =
gaiti = Sans gati = going; movement; motion.


--- Page 233 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 217

(Kardah IX) (37) Ashaunam! vanguhish? siirao’ spentao‘ fravashayd°
yazamaide®. Pouru-spadhao’  yasto-zayao* uzgereptd-drafshao?
bamyao!”. Yao" ughrahu” peshanahu" tadha" nijasen'® khshtevivyo",
tadha”’ yoi'* takhma” khshtavay6o” danubyd”! azen” peshanao”.

(38) Yiizem”‘ tadha’ taurvayata” verethrem”’ danunam” Tiranam”,
yuzem*” tadha*! taurvayata*® tbaéshao*% danunam™“ Tiranam*,
Yishmaoyo” pard*’ kershnaz6* hvira® baon* sévishta*!, yoi* takhma*®
khshtavay6“, yoi* takhma“ saoshyanto*’, yoi* takhma” verethrajan6o™.
Khrimao*! asebish® frazinta® danunam™ baévare-paitinam®™.

(37) We worship® the good’, heroic? (and) beneficent? Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)'. (Who are) possessing many armies’, “girded with
weapons’, having uplifted radiant banners’. (The Fravashis) rush’ there!* in
fearful'* battles’? for (the help of) those heroes'®, where those gallant’?
heroes” offer’ battles’? against the Danus”! (i.e. enemies of the Religion).

(38) There® (i.e. in the battles) you*, (O Fravashis!) overcome” the
victorious strength?’ of the Turanian”? Danus”’; there*' you*® *“overcome* the
malice** of the Turanian* Danus*. Owing to*’ you* *“the chiefs of
assembly*’, the mighty* heroes“, the powerful* *“Saoshyants*’ (and) the
strong” conquerors’ *“become”’ possessed of heroic strength*? and most
beneficent*!.

(Kardah X) (39) Ashaunam! vanguhish? siirao* spentao* fravashayd°
yazamaide’. Yao’ rasmanod* ham-statée’ frakarana” schindayeinti"', vi’
maidhyanem" namayeinti'"; thwashem" paskat'* fravazente'’, avanghe'®
naram” ashaonam”’, azanghe”' duzhvarshtavarezam”.

(39) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)'. Who’ break asunder'' the two wings’ of an army®
standing together in battle array’, and “cause the centre’ (of that army) to
scatter'*'*; they go’’ then'® swiftly’> for the help’* of the righteous”? men’®
(and) for the distress*! of the evil-doers” (i.e. for bringing them into
affliction).

(Kardah XI) (40) Ashaunam! vanguhish? siirao’ spentao‘ fravashayo°

aeq Original form is ydstd-zaydo; root yaongh = Sans, yas = to put on, to gird.

aer i.e. The Fravashis do not allow the Turanian heretics to succeed in the battle; they prevent
the evils caused by them by destroying their strength.

aes karshan + az = “the conductor of the council - assembly; chief” (Darmesteter).
aet i.e. those who throw light of the religion; the pointers of the true path of the religion.

aeu I do not understand the meaning of the last sentence (from the word Khrumdo up to
baévare-paitinam). The places desolated by the chiefs of innumerable Danus are miserable or
inauspicious (Darmesteter).

aev Original meaning “twists”, “bends”; root nam = Sanskrit nam.


--- Page 234 ---

218 KHORDEH AVESTA

yazamaide®’. Yao’ ughrao® aiwithirao’ varethraghnish"”, vanat-
peshanao" raremao” vivaitish’ vichirao™, sravashemnao' sraotanvo'*
asn6-urvano"” ashaonish'*. Yao! dathrish”?? verethrem”! zbayente”’,
dathrish® ayaptem™ chakushe”, dathrish” bantai?’ drvatatem”*.

(41) Dathrish” ahmai*® vohi*! khvarend”, yo hish** atha*
frayazaite*, yatha*’ hish** ho-na” yazata”, yo*! ashava” Zarathushtro*,
ratush“ astvaithyo* gaéthayao%, bareshnush”’ bipaitishtanayao*,
kahmiaichit” yaongham” jaso*', kahmaichit” 4zangham*™ biwivao™.

(40) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)'. Who’ (are) strong’, triumphant’, victorious'®, winning in
battle’, giving excessive joy’, ““blowing away (the enemies)”,
discriminating (good and evil)'*, *“obedient'*, of renowned body'’, having
souls of higher intelligence'’? (and) righteous'*. Who” (are) givers” of
victory”’ to the invoker”, givers”® of boon” to (their) lover?’ (and) givers”® of
health*’ to the sick person?’.

(41) Whilst *“undertaking*! any work whatever? of enterprises*’ (or
whilst) frightened™ in any (difficulty) whatever of the calamities just as*’
that (great) man’, i.e.*' (the Prophet) Holy” Zarathushtra** who is the Lord“
of (this) corporeal** world** and the chief’ of (all) **mortals*® worshipped”
those (Fravashis)**, in the same manner* (they are) the givers*? of good?!
glory” to him*’ who® worship** them™.

(42) *’[Ya0*% huzbatao*] mainyu-vahishtao yao huzbatao mainyu-
shitao*’ frashisente*® bareshnavo® avanghe® ashndo“, amem”
paidhimnao® hutashtem“, verethraghnemcha® Ahuradhatem®,
vanintimcha” uparatatem®, saokamcha® barat-avaretam” barat-
ayaptam”!, ashaonim” thrafedham” yesnyam™” vahmyam”, ashat”
hacha” yat” vahishtat”.

(42) Who® (i.e. the Fravashis) (when they are) well-invoked® go* on the
top® of the yonder® sky, having come from the ““heavenly (space).

Explanation:- (As regards the Fravashis who bring with them the
yazatas, it is stated below).

The well-shapen™ (i.e. of beautiful shape) Ama (courage-giving) yazata”,

aew Root vi-va = Sanskrit vi-va, = blowing away.

aex See yasna Ha 29.4; Ha 46.5; root vi-chi = Persian guzidan.
aey Of wide renown; very famous (Darmesteter).

aez Original meaning: Whilst going for any work whatever.
afa Original meaning: “biped”.

afb This sentence is left out in the original text (see Prof. Geldner, Avesta I Stuttgart, 1889,
page 177, note 1).

afc In the sense of the expression “Ethereal Space, Heavenly Space”.


--- Page 235 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 219

Behram yazata® created by Ahura Mazda, Vanainti®’ Uparatat® (i.e. yazata
y y p y

bestowing victorious superiority), (and) Saoka yazata® (i.e. bestower of
happiness) wealth-bringing”, fulfilling desires”, righteous”, satisfied”,
worthy of worship” and praise” on account of ” the best” righteousness ”°-
(these are the Fravashis) bringing with them (all these blessings).

(43) Tao® herezenti®! Satavaésem® antare® zim*! asmanemcha*®,
tachat-apem®, zavano-sriitem®’, tachat-dpem® ukhshyat-urvarem®,
thrathrai” pasvao” virayao”, thrathrai”® Airyanam™’ dakhyunam”,
thrathrai® géush*’ panchd-hyayao”, avanghe” naram' ashaonam!.

(44) Vi antare? zam? asmanemcha‘ SatavaésO* vijasaiti®, tachat-apo’
zavano-sritd® kachat a4pod° ukhshyat-urvard'’ = srird! ~banvao”
raokhshnemao®, thrathrai'’ pasvao’ virayao", thrathrai'’’ Airyanam"™
dakhyunam” thrathrai” géush?' panchd-hyayao”, avanghe® naram”™
ashaonam”.

(43) They® (Fravashis) send out® (the Star) ““Satavaesa® between* the
earth** and the sky**, **causing the water to flow®, listening to appeals or
supplicatory prayers*®’, causing the water to reach all around® and the plants
to grow’, for nourishment” of cattle?! and men”, for the maintenance” of
Iranian™ Provinces”, for the thriving” of five kinds®* of animals” (and) ““for
the help” of righteous’ men'”.

(44) (The Star named) Satavaesa®, causing the water to flow’, listening to
appeals or supplicatory prayers®, causing the water to reach all around’, (and)
the plants to grow’°, beautiful’, shining’? (and) brilliant’? comes up®
between’ the earth’ and the sky*, for the nourishment of cattle'> and men’®,
for the maintenance’’ of Iranian'® Provinces'®, for the thriving”® of the five
kinds” of animals”' (and) for the help® of righteous** men”.

(Kardaih XID) (45) Ashaunam! vanguhish? siirfo*> spentao*
fravashay6® yazamaide’. Ay6-khaodhao’ ayod-zayao*® ayd-verethrao’,
yao”  peretente' verethraghnyaéshu” raokhshni-aiwidhataéshu®
thakhtao" arezazhish’’ barentish'’, hazangraghnyai'’daévanam'.

(46) Yat’? hish?® antare”! vatd” fravaiti? bard-baodhd* mashyanam”’,
te nar6”’ paiti-zanenti?® yahva” verethra-baodho” te*! abyd” freretao™®
frerenvainti** ashaonam* vanguhibyo* suraiby6* spentabyo* fravash-
ibyd”, thakhtayat® pard“! anghuyat” uzgerewyat® pard“ bazuve*

(45) We worship® the good’, heroic? (and) beneficent’, Fravashis° of the
righteous (people)'. Who (are) possessing iron helmets’, iron weapons® (and)

afd Like the star Tishtrya, the star Satavaesa is useful in the act of prosperity of the world. The
Stars Vanant and Haptoiranga are regarded as his companions.

afe See yasht 5.15 (tatao 4p6); yasht 8,47 (apo tatao).

aff For comparison, see para 10 of the same yasht.


--- Page 236 ---

220 KHORDEH AVESTA

iron armour’; and who! “in the garments of light’> fight", bringing with
them’® stretched’ battle-array’’, (for gaining) victory’, smiting thousands’’
of daevas'®.

(46) When” the wind” blows among”! those (Fravashis)” carrying the
scent™ of men”, these® men’’ recognise’ the scent of victory*® amongst
them”.

Explanation:- (Its significance seems to be that in the war or in times of
difficulties, when men call Fravashis for help, by burning fragrant wood or
frankincense and by invoking in a suitable manner, they fulfil their wishes by
granting victory).

(Also) those*! (men) ““offer* Offerings* unto these*’ good*’, heroic*’
(and) beneficent** Fravashis* with (their) “"sincere*’ heart*!“? (and) “with
arms**“¢ uplifted*’ (by way of supplication).

(47) Yatara* va‘’ dish* paurva® fra-yazente”, fraoret* frakhshni™
avi mano™ zarazdatoit™ anghuyat® hacha‘’, atarathra® fraorisinti?
ughrao® ashaunam® fravashayo”, hathra® Mithracha“’ Rashnucha®
ughracha® Damdish” Upamana® hathra® vata” verethrajana”.

(48) Tao” danghavo” hathra”™ jatao™ nijaghnentc”, panchsaghnai”’
satathanaishcha”, sataghnai” hazangrghnaishcha®, hazangraghnai*!
baévareghnaishcha®”, baévareghnai® ahakhshtaghnaishcha™, yathra®
fraoirisinti® ughrao®”’ ashaunam® fravashayo*” hathra® Mithracha”!
Rashnucha” ughracha® Damoish’’ Upaman6d* hathra® vata”
verethrajan6”.

(47) From amongst (the armies of) both the sides whichever (army) will
first® worship* those (Fravashis)* with ““perfect faith*', devoted heart*, to
that “"direction®® the triumphant® Fravashis® of the righteous (people),
along with Meher™ (yazata), Rashna® yazata (the just), powerful® Dami
“™(Jpamana® (yazata) and the victorious Govad (Yazata) go” (for the help of
that army).

(48) Moreover, those” countries’ are at once” defeated” having
smitten” from fifty” to hundred times’, from hundred” to thousand times®,
from thousand’ to ten thousand times®, innumerable times“, against which

afg i.e. whose garment is light only; or in brilliant dress.

afh Freretao, frerenvainti - the root of these two words is one and the same root:- fra-ar = to of-
fer, to grant.

afi Original meanings, “strong, Firmly stretched, drawn”.
afj For comparison, see yasna 28.1 (ustand-zasto).

afk Or with sympathetic thought and devoted conscience.
afl Original meaning, “to that side of the two”.

afm Its original meaning, “the symbol of wisdom - the simile of wisdom’’.


--- Page 237 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 221

(countries)® the triumphant*’ Fravashis® of the righteous (people)* along
with” Meher” (yazata), Rashna” yazata (the just yazata) powerful’? Dami™
Upamana® (yazata) and the victorious”* Govad”’ (yazata) go*°.

(Kardah XIII) (49) Ashaunaim! vanguhish? sirdo* spentao‘*
fravashay6® yazamaide’. Yao’ visadha® avayeinti? Hamaspathmaédaém”
paiti' ratim'’, dat’ athra™ vicharenti'’ dasa" pairi khshafno”, avat'®
avo” zikhshnaonghemnao”.

(50) KG?! nd” stavat?, k6*4 yazaite*, ko? ufyat?’, k6** frinat”, ko°°
paiti-zanat*'; gaomata®’ zasta* vastravata*‘ asha-nasa* nemangha”.
Kahe*’ nd°** idha® nama“ Aghairyat", kahe? vo* urvd* frayezyat*,
kahmai* no” tat* dathrem” dayat*, yat®! he? anghat® khvairyan™
khvarethem ajyamnem® yavaécha™ yavaétataécha*”.

(49) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)!. Who’ on"! the occasion’? of Hamaspathmaedem (Season-
Festival) come’ to the *““streets*, and move about!> for **ten’® nights!” towards
those desiring” help!” (as below).

(50) Who”! will praise’? us? Who” will worship? (us)? Who”? will sing
our glory?’? And who will keep love” (for us)? (Besides) who*? will
“Pwelcome”! (us) with the hand* containing ““food”, clothings™ (and) with a
prayer® causing to reach righteousness*? Whose*’ name*’ of us** will be
remembered" here*’? Whose” soul“ of you® will worship* (us)? To whom**
of us*’ will that* gift be given®°? Which*! will (become) (as) fresh** forever,
for eternity.

afn,

(51) Aat® yo” na® hish®” fra-yazaite”, gaomata® zasta™ vastravata®
asha-nasa® nemangha”, ahmai® afrinenti® khshnutao” ainitao”
atbishtao” ughrao”™ ashaunam” fravashayo”>.

(52) Buyat” ahmi” nmane” geushcha” vathwa® upa*! viranamcha*’,
buyat® asushcha* aspo*® derezrascha® vakhsho*’, buyat®® na® stahyo”
vyakhano”!, yo” no” badha™  fra-yazaite’’, gaoamata’® zasta’”’
vastravata™ asha-nasa” nemangha!™,

(51) Moreover*!, the person® who® worships” those (Fravashis)* with the
hand“ containing food® (and) clothing® and with the prayer®’ causing to reach
righteousness”, the Fravashis’ of the righteous (people)”, pleased”,
undistressed” and unoffended” bless that (person) (as stated below):-

afn The meaning of visa is also, “family, clan” (see yasna Ha 9.7).
afo i.e. Ten nights inclusive of days, i.e. ten full days.

afp In English, “to welcome”. Its meaning is also “will know”. Sanskrit root gnya = to know. Its
significance is that who will welcome us by invoking us with good food and with the gift of
clothing? Moreover, the Fravashis are pleased by presenting those consecrated things to the just
and worthy men.

afq Original meaning, “having meat”.


--- Page 238 ---

222 KHORDEH AVESTA

(52) (The Fravashis bless the worshippers):- May there be’ in this”
“*house’® the increase*’ of cattle” and men**! May there be a swift** horse*
and **a solid®* chariot*”! The man®, the chieftain of the assembly”! who” will
verily™ worship” us™ with the hand®’ containing food*’ and clothing” (and)
with the prayer’ causing to reach righteousness”, may become™®
“powerful”.

(Kardaih XIV) (53) Ashaunim! vanguhish? sirdo> spentao*
fravashayo® yazamaide®. Yao’ apam® Mazda-dhatanam’ srirao"” patho”
daésayeinti’, yao’ para’ ahmat' hishtenta’® fradhatao’’ afratat-
kushish'’, hamaya” gatvo”’ dareghemchit”! pairi? zrvanem”’.

(54) Aat™ tao’ niram”* fratachinti?’, Mazdadhatem”  paiti?
pantam*, baghd-bakhtem*' paiti*? yaonem*®, frathwarshtem™ paiti*
afentem*®, zaoshai*? Ahurahe Mazdao*, zaoshai*? Ameshanam
Spentanam”.

(53) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)'. Who’ point out’? the good" paths! to the *“waters®
created by Ahura Mazda; which” “‘stood'® *“still!’, “*without flowing out
from the springs'’, for a long”! time’’, prior to’ this!> (pointing out the paths
by the Fravashis).

(54) But™ now”, *’for the wish*” of Ahura Mazda** (and) for the wish” of
the Bountiful Immortals“, those (waters) *“flow?’ along” the path*® created
by Ahura Mazda’*, bestowed by God?! (and) along** the water way* fixed**
(for them).

(Kardah XV) (55) Ashaunaim! vanguhish? sirao*> spentao‘*
fravashayo® yazamaide®. Yao’ urvaranam® khvawriranam’ srirao”
uruthmish" daésayeinti’, yao’? para’ ahmat' hishtenta’’ fradhatao”
afraokhshyeintish'’, hamaya” gatvo”’ dareghemchit”' pairi” zrvanem”’.

(56) Aat®4 tao naram”* fravakhshyeinti?’, Mazdadhatem?* paiti?
pantam*, baghd-bakhtem*' paiti*? yaonem*®, frathwarshtem™ paiti*
zrvanem**, zaoshai*’ Ahurahe Mazdao**, zaoshai* Ameshanim

afr i.e. In that family where the worship of the Fravashis with libations is performed.
afs If it is understood in the sense of fraderesra, it would be, “beautiful, fair”.

aft “The praiser (of God)”, derived from the root stu. (Darmesteter).

afu The word is genitive plural in the original sense:- “Of the waters”.

afv Original meaning “fixed, settled”; root fra-da = Sanskrit dha.

afw Afratat-kushi - a = not; fra = forward, kushi = Sanskrit kukhshi = pit, cave, stream.
afx In winter on the earth and in the dripping of water in the air (Darmesteter).

afy i.e. at the will of the Creator Ahura Mazda and of the Bountiful Immortals, by subjugating to
their command.

afz For comparison of this para, see Tir yasht, para 35.


--- Page 239 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 223

Spentanam”.

(55) We worship® the good’, heroic? and beneficent’ Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)'. Who maintain’? beautiful’? growths'' of the trees®
*8’self-bearing as fruits’; which” stood" still!’ without growing'® on one and
the same”? place”® for” a long”’ time” prior to™ (help)’*.

(56) But** now’® those’? (trees) grow up?’ in the path*® created by Ahura
Mazda’, in** the path*? bestowed by God?! (and) at the appointed* time*®, for
the wish*’ of Ahura Mazda (and) for the wish* of the Bountiful Immortals”.

(Kardah XVI) (57) Ashaunam! vanguhish? sirao? spentio*
fravashay0*® yazamaide’. Yao’ stram® maonghd’ hiro” anaghranam"™
raochangham” patho" daésayen™ ashaonish'*, yoi'®’ para!’ ahmat'®
hame” gatvo”’ dareghem”' hishtenta” afrashimant6d”, daévanam”™ pard*
tbaéshanghat”, daévanam”’ par6o” draomohu”.

(58) Aat®” te! niiram?! fravazenti diraéurvaésem* adhvano*,
urvaésem”* nashemna”’ yim" frashokeretoit® vanghuyao”.

(57) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)’. Who’ *“opened'* the right'> paths'? of the stars*, the
Moon’, the Sun'® (and) of the Endless!! Lights! (of the sky). Which'* (i.e. the
Stars, the Moon, the Sun, etc.) stood” **‘without revolving” for a long time”!
ere’’ this’* (i.e. up to the time Fravashis did not help) on account of” the
evil’® assaults™ of the demons”.

(58) But®® now® they*’ proceed further’? towards distant** **paths*,
desiring *‘the advent’ of the good*° Renovation”.

(Kardaih XVII) (59) Ashaunaim! vanguhish? siirao* spentao‘*
fravashayo® yazamaide®. Yao’ avat® zrayd? aiwyakhshayeinti' yat!!
Vouru-kashem” bamim!3, navacha' navaitishcha'® navacha_sata'®
navacha hazangra"’ navasescha baévan'®,

(59) We worship® the good’, heroic? (and) beneficent? Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)'. Who are ninety-nine thousand '7'* nine hundred’® and
*°ninety-nine’*'> in number keep watch over this® shining’? sea? Vouru-

aga Original meaning “shows”; i.e. help for the good growth of the trees.

agb khvawrira = khva + ira (suffix); root bar = to bear = to produce, hu + awra + ira = made
fresh well with watery clouds.

age Original meaning “showed”.

agd Original meaning “without moving forward”; frashi = fratanch+shi. root fra-anch = to
move forward.

age Its significance is to be understood as in English “Infinite or Measureless Space”.

agf Here the word urvaésa is used in the sense of the English word “point” (i.e. fixed period). Its
meaning is “end, final change” also.

agg In the original text the figure is thus: “ninety-thousand’* and nine thousand" and nine hun-


--- Page 240 ---

224 KHORDEH AVESTA

kasha!?.*8"

(Kardaih XVIID (60) Ashaundim! vanguhish’? sirdo* spentao‘
fravashay6* yazamaide®. Yao’ ave® stréush? aiwyakhshayeinti’ ya"
Haptoiringe’, navacha’ navaitishcha’ navacha_ sata'®> navacha
hazangra" navasescha baévan”.

(60) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)’. Who’ are ninety-nine thousand'*!’, nine hundred’* and
ninety-nine'*'* in number keep watch over'® these® stars? (called)
**'Haptoiringa!.

(Kardah XIX) (61) Ashaunam!' vanguhish? sirdo*? spentdo*
fravashayo® yazamaide®’. Yao’ avam*® kehrpem’ aiwyakhshayeinti",
yam" Samahe” Keresaspahe’ yat'* Gaésaus'’ gadhavarahe", navacha"’
navaitishcha" navacha sata” navacha hazangra”’ navasescha baévan”'.

(61) We worship® the good’, heroic? and beneficent’ Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)'. Who’ are ninety-nine thousand”*', nine hundred’? and

ninety-nine'”'*, in number “keep watch over" this® body’ of Kersaspa'? of
16

the Sama family”, the curly-haired’> and the mace-wielder’®.

(Kardaih XX) (62) Ashaunaim! vanguhish? sirdao*> spentao‘
fravashayO® yazamaide’. Yao’ avam® khshudrem’ aiwyakhshayeinti",
yam" Spitamahe” ashaon6o” Zarathushtrahe"™, navacha’ navaitishcha'’®
navacha sata!’ navacha hazangra’ navasescha baévan”’.

(62) We worship® the good’, heroic* (and) beneficent* Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)’. Who’ are ninety-nine thousand'*"’, nine hundred'’ and
ninety-nine'*'®, in number *“keep watch over" this® seed’? of the Holy”

dred'* and ninety'> and nine”. For its comparison, see Vendidad fargard XXII, para 2. In the
matter of numbers in Avesta there comes first the lower followed by higher denomination; e.g.
panchacha haptdaiti = five and seventy, i.e. seventy five.

agh The reason of keeping watch over the Sea called, Vouru-kasha is that Gaokerena or White
Haoma grows in it, which is used for drinking on the Day of Resurrection, in order to be immor-
tal. For further details, see my translation of the Vendidad, fargard XX, para 4, note.

agi Haptoiringa is the chief of the stars of the north. It is compared with Ursa Major. This star
along with its companions, guards the gate and passage of hell, in order to prevent 99,999
demons, drujas, fairies, etc., coming out from hell, and for its authority 99,999 Fravashis come
for help (See English translation of Minok i Kherad by Dr. West, Chapter 49, para 15).

agj The hero Keresaspa is one amongst the famous personages mentioned in later books of the
Zoroastrian Religion. According to Bundehesh he lies in the plain of Peshyansai. The glory of
heaven guards him, because when Zohak will be unfettered, he will rise and slay him.
Moreover, innumerable Fravashis of the righteous people also guard him. According to Minok i
Kherad, near the Mount Damavand where Zohak is bound with a chain, the hero Keresaspa lies
asleep in the place called Poshta Gushtaspan (see English Translation of Dr. West).

agk Because from that seed Saoshyant - the future Benefactor will be born. According to later
books, from the seed of the Prophet Zarathushtra, Hoshedar, Hoshedar-Mah and Soshyosh will
be born from the wombs of Srutat-Fedhri, Vanghu-Fedhri and Eredat-Fedhri, respectively.


--- Page 241 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 225

Spitama” Zarathushtra’*.

(Kardaih XXI) (63) Ashaunaim! vanguhish? sirdo* spentao*
fravashay6* yazamaide’. Yao’ Ahurahe® khshayatd’ dashinam” upa"™
yuidhyeinti’, yezi'’ aém'* bavati'’ ashava'’-khshnish’”, yezi'*-she”?
bavainti?® anazaretéo?! khshnutao” ainitao*, atbishtao** ughraio*
ashaunam” fravashay6’’.

(63) We worship® the good’, heroic? and beneficent’ Fravashis* of the
righteous (people)!. Who’ fight"? at!! the right side’ of the ruling? lord® (i.e.
the ruling Sovereign of the period).

Explanation:- (As regards the qualities of that sovereign, it is stated).

If’ that’* (Sovereign) is'> “"rejoicing’’ the righteous (person)'®, (and) if*
the triumphant” Fravashis”’ of the righteous (people)” are”? not-harmed”',
not oppressed”’ and not offended™ by him’ (but) are”® pleased” (then they

fight for the help of that Sovereign).

(Kardaih XXII) (64) Ashaunam! vanguhish’ siirao°’ spentao‘*
fravashay6® yazamaide®. Yao’ masyehish® ahmat’, yao! aojyehish
ahmat, yao tashyehish'* ahmat, yao amavastarao ahmat, yao
verethravastarao” ahmat”', yao” baéshazydtarao* ahmat*4, yao*
yaskerestarao” ahmat?’, yatha*® vacha”  framravaire*®; yao"!
madhememchit®” myazdanam* baévane™ upavazente*.

(65) Aat yat®* apd*’ uzbarente**, Spitama® Zarathushtra”, zra-
yanghat*' hacha®” Vouru-Kashat*? khvarenascha“ yat Mazdadhatem*.
Aat® frashisenti” ughrao* ashaunam® fravashayo™, paoirish* pouru-
satao”, paoirish® pouru-hazangrao™, paoirish® pouru-baévano™.

(64) We worship® the good’, heroic’, (and) beneficent* Fravashis° of the
righteous (people)!. Who’ are greater’, stronger'!, firmer'*, more powerful”,
victorious”, healing’ and more effective’® **"than’* **°can be expressed*’ in
words”, (and) who?! come* **by thousands into the midst® of the libations*
(i.e. of the gifts dedicated in ceremonies).

agl i.e. by thrusting aside the enemy at the time of defeating, the Fravashis fight for the help of
that sovereign so that he may become victorious.

agm i e. the rejoicer of the righteous man by offering the required help and the supporter of his
creed.

agn Original meaning, “by it” (demonstrative pronoun ablative singular); According to the
idiom I have translated “once”, yao ...... ahmat which comes with every adjective and have left
off after that.

ago i.e. become so indescribably powerful and victorious. Framravaire - Perfect tense third per-
son plural atmanepada; Duplicated form is dropped. In the same way it occurs in “nighraire”
(root jan = to smite); see yasht 10.40.

agp Original meaning is. “ten thousand”, i.e. they come in large numbers for participating in ce-
remonial offerings dedicated to them.


--- Page 242 ---

226 KHORDEH AVESTA

(65) When* (the Fravashis) “*bring** waters*’ (and) “(the Iranian)
Glory“ created by Ahura Mazda* from the sea Vouru-kasha*!*** (then) O
Spitama* Zarathushtra**! the strong** Fravashis of the righteous (people)
(who are) countless, proceed further*’ (to them).

(66) Apem*’ aéshemnao* havai® kachit® nafyai, havayai® vise%,
havai™ zantave®, havayai® dainghave” uityaojanao®, khvaépaithe® no”
dainghush” nidhataécha” haoshataécha”.

(67) Tao! yiiidhyeinti? peshanahu? have‘ asahi® shéithraécha‘, yatha’
aso® maéthanemcha’ aiwishitée’’ dadhara'’. Manayen ahe yathana”
takhm6' rathaéshtao' hush-hamberetat'® hacha'® shaétat'’ yasto-
zaénish’® paiti-ghnita”.

(68) Aat?’ yaoscha”! dongham” nivanente”, tao** Apem?> parazenti’®,
havai?’ kachit® nafyai?*, havayai*’ vise*', havai? zantave*, havayai™
dainghave* uityaojanao”, khvaépaithe*’ no** dainghush” fradhataécha”
varedhataécha”.

(66) And every® (Fravashi) wishing®* water*’ for his own® kindred*,

clan®, town® (and) country®’, “speak as under®:-

Our” own® country” is in calamity” and **‘drought.

agu

(67) Just as a warrior'*, gallant’? and “girded with weapons’, fight!
against (the enemy) for the sake of his well-horded’> **’fortune!’, (the same
way) they’ (i.e. the Fravashis) fight* in battles* at their own’ place® and in
their own country®; which’ each ( Fravashi) has fixed! for watch’®.

(68) Moreover” those’ (Fravashis) who?! gain victory” (in securing
water) carry it away” for his own?’ kindred”’, clan*!, town** (and) country
(and) speak as under’*®:-

“Our® own?’

prosperity.”

country” (will now emerge) into abundance and

agw.
(69) Aat yat? bavaiti® avi-spashtd“ sasta danghéush* hamo-

agq The water having gone up in the form of vapour rained, raising the prosperity of the coun-

try, (see Tir yasht, paras 32-34).

agr See beginning portion of Atash Nyayesh.

ags Original meaning, “speaking thus” (present participle feminine nominative plural).

agt Darmesteter. Haoshat - root hush = to dry up; locative singular of haosha—; Also nidhdat,
taking in the sense of zakhireh (stored up provision) corresponding to Persian nehddeh, means,
“prosperity, abundant food”; and haoshat - hao-hu = sufficient, full; shata = joy. Thus it can be
translated: “may our own country have prosperity and joy!”

agu Yasta = ydsta; root yah = Sanskrit yds = to put on; zaéni = weapon.

agv Or treasures, wealth; if the word, khshaétat is taken, it would mean sovereignty, i.e. king-
dom of his own country.

agw For its comparison, see para 66 of the same yasht.


--- Page 243 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 227

khshathro“”, aurvathaéiby6o* pard” tbishyanbyo™, tao*! haschit” upa-
zbayeite* ughrao™ ashaunam® fravashayo™.

(70) Tao*” he* jasaonti® avanghe®, yezi*'-she” bavainti® anazaretao™
khshnutao® ainitao®, at-bishtao® ughrao® ashaunam”® fravashayo”.
Tao” dim” ava” nifravayente’, manayen ahe yatha” na” meregh6d”
hupareno”.

(69) When” ***an absolute*’ king* of any country” is **Ytaken unawares**
“ by the inimical opponents**”, he invokes for help* those*! triumphant™
Fravashis® of the righteous (people)*.

63

(70) If! the triumphant® Fravashis” of the righteous (people)® are® not
harmed™ oppressed® or offended® by him® (but) are® pleased, they go® for
the help® of that (Sovereign)*,*” (in the shape of) well-winged”™ bird”.
They”! fly” towards him’? (for help).

(71) Tao” he® snaithishcha*' varethascha® parshtascha® pairivar-
ascha* visente®*, pairi** mainyaoyat’’ drujat*, varenyayatcha®
drvaithyat”, ziziyishatcha®”' kayadhat”, vispo-mahrkaatcha”™ pairi™
drvatat®> yat”® angrat mainyaot’’, manayen ahe hatha” na” satemcha!”
hazangremcha! baévarech2’ pairishtanam’ nijathem‘ hyat®.

(72) Yatha® ndit’ tat* paiti? karetd’’ hufrangharsht6d", ndit’? vazrd™
hunivikht6", ndit'’ ishush'® khvathakhtd"”, ndit'® arshtish” hvaivyasta”,
noit”! asand” aremodshutd” avasyat™*.

(71) Those” (Fravashis) serve® as** weapon*', a shield®, support® and
defence *"*for him*®® against the invisible®’ druj,** and the Varenian®
wicked” and the tormenting®’ sinful man” and against (him) who” is the
wicked® Angra Mainyu”, full of (infested with) death’?.

Explanation:- (How do they serve as defence, etc., is stated below).

99 ahb. 5 ahe

Just as”® one man” “would be? “equal to a hundred'™, thousand! or ten
thousand? (men) from amongst the tested (men)’.

(72) So that® neither’ the sword’® well-thrust"', nor’ the club’ sufficiently
made ponderous", neither'> the arrow'® well-aimed'’, nor'® the spear’? well-

agx Original meaning, “possessing full power”; from it, “most powerful”.
agy In the sense of “has been surprised”.

agz Dr. Geldner regards the word nd as doubtful and says: “it would be better if it were not
there”.

aha i.e. as stated in para 69, “for the sovereign terrified by the enemy”.

ahb If the meaning of the nijathem deriving from the Sanskrit ni-han = “to disregard, to take no
heed of” is taken, its translation would be “Just as one man does not care for a thousand men”,
i.e. owing to the power of those Fravashis that man gets extraordinary strength (Darmesteter).

ahc In a manner that a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand warriors are fighting (to help him)
Darmesteter.


--- Page 244 ---

228 KHORDEH AVESTA

darted’, nor”! the stones” hurled by force of arms” (i.e. sling-stones) *"‘shall
hit (him guarded by the Fravashis).

(73) Visente?> avat”* vi sentaécha”’ mazdayaschit”® airime-anghadh6”
ashaunam” vanguhish*' sirao* spentao® fravashayo*, avat* avo**
zikhshnaonghemnao~’. K6** no” stavat”, ko“! yazaite”, ko* ufyat“, ko*
frinat”, ko” pait-zanat*, gaomata” zasta*’ vastravata*'! asha-nasa™
nemangha™. Kahe no idha nama aghairyat, kahe vo urva frayezyat,
kahmai nd tat dathrem dayat, yat he anghat khvairyan khvarethem
ajyamnem yavaécha yavaétataécha.

(73) The excellent>', heroic? (and) beneficent Fravashis* of the righteous
(people), sitting not at ease”? go> from one place”® to “*another’® (i.e. are
always moving), (to help the sovereign) desiring*’ this* (i.e. stated as under)

36

help”.

Who* will praise* us*?? Who"! will worship (us)? Who* will sing our“
glory? (And) who* will love (us). (Besides) who*’ will welcome* (us) with
the hand” containing food” (and) clothings*' (and) a prayer® causing *"to
reach righteousness”?

(74) Asnao! yazamaide?, mando? yazamaide‘’, daéndo*® yazamaide’,
Saoshyantéam’ yazamaide. Urun6d® yazamaide’. Pasukanam" yaza-
maide", daitikanam’ yazamaide’, upapanam™ yazamaide', upasma-
nam’* yazamaide”, frapterejatam' yazamaide”, ravascharatam”’ yaza-
maide”', chang-ranghacham” yazamaide™, fravashayo”** yazamaide”.

(75) Fravashis” yazamaide’’, aredrao** yazamaide”, takhmao~
yazamaide*', tanchishtao” yazamaide*, spentao* yazamaide*,
spénishtao*’ yazamaide*’, sirao** yazamaide”, sévishtao” yazamaide"
derezrao” yazamaide®, aiwithirao“ yazamaide*, ughrao* yazamaide”,
aojishtao* yazamaide”, révish® yazamaide*', renjishtao” yazamaide™,
yaskeretO™ yazamaide™, yaskerestemao™ yazamaide*’.

(74) We **worship® *"the innate wisdom! of the *“Saoshyants’, (their)
mental power’, commandments of the religion® (and their) souls*. Amongst

ahd For its comparison, see Hormazd yasht, para 18.

ahe The word mazdayaschit is not understood, Darmesteter taking the letter “d” as superfluous
and regarding it as comparative degree of maz, translates “and even more”. Westergaard has
changed the word into anyaschit (other side).

ahf For the translation of the remaining portion, see para 50 of this yasht.
ahg In this para there comes “yazamaide” after every word. I have translated it only twice.

ahh There is also the word dsna khratu - (see yasna Ha 22, para 25, Siroza, Khshnuman of Bah-
man).

ahi The meaning of Saoshyants (in plural) is, persons who guided the religion prior to the advent
of the Prophet Zarathushtra, the indicators of the divine-moral path, the benefactors of the
world.


--- Page 245 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 229

the animals'° we worship” the Fravashis™ of wild animals’, of the animals
living in water’, animals living on the ground’*, “the winged creatures'®, the
animals that wander wild at large” and of ‘the grazing animals”.

(75) We worship “the Fravashis”* that bestow’’, the valiant?’ Fravashis”°,
most valiant? Fravashis”*, beneficent** Fravashis”, heroic**® Fravashis”
profitable*’ Fravashis”®, the steadfast” (i.e. firm in their work) Fravashis”®,
triumphant“ (i.e. victorious in the work) Fravashis*® powerful*® and most
powerful", agile*° Fravashis*®, and the effective (or efficacious™) Fravashis”.

(76) Tao* zi * henti® yaskerestemao" vayao* manivao® daman%™,
yao ashaunam® vanguhish®’ sirao® spentao® fravashayd”, yao”!
tadha” eredhwao” hishtenta“, yat® mainyu” daman” daidhitem’,
yascha” Spentd Mainyush™, yascha*! angro™.

(77) Yat*® titarat** angrd mainyush* dahim® ashahe*’ vanghéush*,
antare® pairi-avaitem” Vohicha Mano”! Atarshcha”.

(78) Tao? he™ taurvayatem*® tbaéshao’ angrahe mainyéush”’
drvato"’, yat® noit' apd! takaish? stayat’, noitt urvarao> uruthmaibyo°
hakat’ siirahe® dathushd’ khshayato!® Ahurahe Mazdao" fratachin”
apo" sévishtao’, uzukhshyancha* urvarao".

(76) They*’, i.e.© the good” heroic’, (and) beneficent® Fravashis” of the

righteous (people) are® indeed* “most effective’! among the creatures™ of
the two” Spirits®.

Explanation:- (Its reason is stated as under).

When” the two Spirits” - Spenak Menok* and the Angra Mainyu® -
created” the creation”, they’! (i.e. the Fravashis) “"stood”™ firm” thither’!
(for granting help).

ahn.

(77) (Moreover) when® Angra Mainyu “rushed with violence™ in the
creation®’ of good righteousness®*’ Vohu Manah (Amshaspand) and adar
(yazata) *°went” between them®.

(78) “They” *“destroyed®® the evils®® of the wicked** Angra Mainyu”, so

ahj i.e. the creatures that fly in the air.

ahk t For its explanation, see Vispered Karda 1, para 1.

ahl i.e. Possessing excellent qualities.

ahm From this it is seen that the Fravashis existed, prior to the creation of the creatures.
ahn With the intention of defiling creations of Nature.

aho i.e. Between righteous creatures and angra mainyeush. Pairi-avditem - potential mood third
person dual parasmaipada; root pairiava = to meddle; to come in across.

ahp i.e. the Fravashis; Tao being the pronoun in feminine gender applies to fravashayo
(Fravashis).

ahq Taurvayatem - imperfect third person dual parasmaipada from the root taurv = Sanskrit tarv


--- Page 246 ---

230 KHORDEH AVESTA

that” (he) “could? not! stop? the waters! from flowing? (and) the trees®
from growing’. (Its result was that) ““the most beneficent'* waters! of the
omnipotent® Creator? (and) the Ruler’? (over all the creations) began to flow”
at once’, and the trees'® began to sprout’.

(79) Vispao apo’ yazamaide”’; vispao” urvarao?! yazamaide”’;
vispao* ashaunam”™ vanguhish”?> siirao” spentao”’ fravashayo” yaza-
maide”. Nameni* ap0*! yazamaide”; nameni* urvarao™ yazamaide*;
nameni*® ashaunam*’ vanguhish* siirfo” spentaio*” fravashayo"
yazamaide™.

(79) We praise’? all!’ the *waters'*; we praise” all?° the trees?', We
worship” all’? the good”, heroic’® (and) beneficent?’ Fravashis™* of the
righteous (people). We praise’ the waters*', and the trees* by (their
special) t*°

ahu.

names**. We worship” the good*’, heroic? (and) beneficen
Fravashis*’ of the righteous (people)*’ with (their special) names*’.

(80) Vispanamcha dongham paoiryanam fravashinim idha yaza-
maide fravashim, avam yam Ahurahe Mazdao, mazishtamcha vahish-
tamcha sraéshtamcha, khraozdishtamcha khrathwishtamcha hukerep-
temamcha, ashat apandtemamcha.*”

(81) Yenghe™ urva® manthrd® Spentd“, aurusho® raokhshno®
fraderesro”. Kehrpascha® yao® raéthwayeiti” srirao’’ Ameshanam
Spentanam”, verezdao” Ameshanam Spentanam”™; hvare-khshaétem”™
aurvat-aspem” yazamaide”.

(80) And the first among all these Fravashis, do we worship here the
Fravashi, of Ahura Mazda, (which is) the greatest, the best, fairest, firmest,
wisest, most gracious, which hath reached the highest (stage) through Asha.

(81) Whose®! *"soul® (is) the beneficent™ (or holy) manthra, white®,
brilliant® (and) beautiful®’

= to break, to destroy.

ahr Statyat — Imperfect causal third person singular; root sta = to stand; staya = to cause to
stand, to stop (causal).

ahs Original meaning, “brave, heroic”.

aht i.e. to the waters of various kinds; such as of the springs, of the rivers, of the wells, of rains,
etc. whose description occurs at the end of Khorshed Nyayesh, in yasna Ha 38, paras 3-5. yasna
Ha 68, para 6.

ahu i.e. trees of various kinds. We do not find any reference about this in the Avesta; but it is
found in the Pahlavi Bundehesh, Chapter 27. See English translation by Dr. West in S.B.E. Vol.
V.

ahv For the translation of this para, see yasna Ha 26, para 2.

ahw i.e. The Soul of the Creator Ahura Mazda; pronoun yenghe occurring in the preceding para
applies to Ahurahe Mazdao.


--- Page 247 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 231

We praise the beautiful” (and) *“efficacious” form® of Ameshaspand”
the swift-footed horse, Sun’ which® (Ahura Mazda) “has given
allegorically” to the Ameshaspand”™.

(Kardah XXIII) (82) Ashaundam vanguhish sirao spentao fravashayo
yazamaide. Yao Ameshanaim Spentanam, khshaétanaim verezi-
doithranam berezatam aiwyamananam, takhmanam 4hiiryandm, yoi
aithye-janghd ashavano.*”

(83) Yoi' hapta” ham6-manangho’, yoi* hapta*’ ham6-vachanghoO*, yoi’
hapta® ham6-shyaothnaonghd’?. Yaésham" asti'’ hamem’ mand”,
hamem"™ vachd', hamem!* shyaothnem!”’, hamd'* patacha’’ frasas-
tacha”’, yo”! dadhvao” Ahuréd Mazda”.

(84) Yaésham™ anyo* anyehe* urvanem”’ aiwi-vaénaiti**, mereth-
wentem” humataéshu*’, merethwentem*! hikhtaéshu”’, merethwentem**
hvarshtaéshu**, merethwentem* gardnmanem*; yaésham*’ raokhsh-
naongho* pantano” avayatam” avi‘! zaothrao”.

(83) (There) (are) seven* (Ameshaspand) of one thought’, one word®, and
one deed’. Whose”® thought'’, word'> (and) deed’ *“is the same'®. Whose'®
father’? and teacher” (is) the same’, i.e.7! the Creator** Ahura Mazda*’.

(84) (Moreover) of whom™ one” sees*® the soul?’ of the other” (i.e.
Ameshaspand can see the souls of one another).

Explanation:- (As regards the state of that soul it is explained below).
Applying his mind” in good thoughts*’, (mind*!) good **words”, and
good deeds*, applying his mind to (the Heaven) Garothman*®. (Also)
Whose*’ paths are illuminated*®, while coming” to*! the votive offerings”.

(Kardah XXIV) (85) Ashaunim! vanguhish? sirdao*> spentao‘*
fravashayo® yazamaide®’. Yamcha’ athro® urvazishtahe’ spentahe’
vyakhnahe", yamcha’? Sraoshahe’® ashyehe’* takhmahe’  tanu-
manthrahe® darshi-draosh’7 Ahiiryehe'®, yamcha! Nairyehe
Sanghahe”’.

(86) Yamcha”! Rashnaosh” razishtahe*’, yamcha™ Mithrahe** vouru-
gaoyaditdish**, yamcha”’ manthrahe*® spentahe”, yamcha*” ashno*',

ahx See yasna Ha 46.3; or increasing; root veredh = Sanskrit vridh + da (ta).

ahy Original meaning, “gives the form”. Raéthwayeiti - denominative verb causal. For its ex-
planation, see my Avesta Grammar, page 248.

ahz For the translation of this para, see yasna Ha 26, para 3, Yasna Ba Maeni.

aia i.e. thoughts, words and deeds of the Seven Ameshaspand are one and the same, without the
slightest difference.

aib Or in such state of concentrating his mind in good thoughts, good words and good deeds;
merethwant = mere + ta + vant), Past Participle Active. Root mere = Sanskrit smri = to remem-
ber, See my Avesta Grammar, page 266.


--- Page 248 ---

232 KHORDEH AVESTA

yamcha” apo*%, yamcha* zemd*, yamcha* urvarayao*’, yamcha*®
géush®, yamcha” gayehe“', yamcha® staoyO* ashavaoyo“.

(86) We worship® the good’ heroic? (and) beneficent* Fravashis° of the
righteous (people)’.

We worship® the **Fravashi’ of the Fire® (called) *“‘Urvazishta’, the
beneficent!’ and the *"sitter (leader) in the assembly", the Fravashi! of the
holy'* Srosh’> (yazata) who is strong'*, word-incarnate’®, possessed of
terrible weapon (for smiting the demons)’’ (and) acting according to the Law
of Ahura Mazda'* as well as the Fravashi"® of “’Neryosang (yazata)”’.

(86) (We worship) the Fravashi?! of the Just Rashna (yazata), the
Fravashi™ of Mithra (yazata)’*> of wide pastures”, the Fravashi’’ of the
beneficent” (or holy”) “Holy Spell?* the Fravashi*’ of the sky*', and water",
the Fravashi*™ of the earth*’, and the trees*’, the Fravashi** of the cattle*’, the
Fravashis” of *'the life*! and “/Creation®.

(87) Gayehe* Marethnd” ashaond” fravashim* yazamaide*; yo~
paoiryo* Ahurai Mazdai** manascha™ giishta® sasnaoscha*, yahmat*”’
hacha** frathweresat® nafo° Airyanam® dakhyunam®, chithrem®
Airyanam®™ dakhyunam®.

Zarathushtrahe® Spitamahe®” idha® ashaond® ashimcha” fravash-
Imcha”! yazamaide”.

(88) Paoiryai? vohi™ mamandai”*, paoiryai” vohii”” vaokushe”’,
paoiryai” vohi*’ vaverezushe*!, paoiryai® athaurune*®, paoiryai™
rathaéshtai*, paoiryai*® vastryai*’ fshuyante*, paoiryai® fravaédhai”,
paoiryai”' fravaédhayamnai”, paoiryai® hanghananai™, paoiryai’
hanghanushe”, gamcha®’ ashemcha”® ukhdemcha” ukhdhakhyacha'™”
sraoshem! khshathremcha’, vispacha’ vohi* Mazdadhata‘® ashachithra’.

(87) We worship” the Fravashi*® of the righteous*’? Gayomard*“°. Who*
first®' listened to* the thought™ of (the Creator) Ahura*? Mazda*® and (His)
teachings®*; from which*’** (the Creator Ahura Mazda) ““created* the
aic The pronoun, yamcha occurring in this and the following para stands for Fravashim. The
original meaning of yamcha is, “and whom’.

aid The fire within the plants which renders help for their growth (see yasna H3 17.11). Also its
meaning is, “most joy-giving, most joyous”.

aie Or the convener of the assembly, the head of an assembly or the President of the assembly.
aif The Messenger of Ahura Mazda (see Vendidad fargard 19, 34; fargard 22,7).

aig The word, yazamaide occurring in the beginning of para 85 is to be taken here.

aih Its meaning is, “Marespand yazata” also.

aii Its meaning would seem to be for (the benefit of) man.

aij Staoy6 ashavaoyo.

aik i.e. the entire Iranian race originated from the descent of Gayomard.


--- Page 249 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 233

lineage™ of (the people of) Iranian®' countries”, the origin® of (the people
of) Iranian“ countries®. We worship” here® the holiness” of the holy”
Spitaman®’ Zarathushtra® and (his) Fravashi”.

(88) (Who, i.e. the Prophet Zarathushtra) first” thought” good” “thought
(according to the law of the Religion of Ahura Mazda), spoke” good word”
(and) first” did*’ the good action®®. Also, who was the first’? Athravan® (=
priest), Rathaeshtar*’ (= warrior) and the (prosperity-bringing**)
agriculturist®’ (of the country). (Who) first*® gained the knowledge of the
religion”, and taught” (it) first?! (to others). Moreover, who was the first™
“™chooser™ (thought of the welfare) of the *"cattle’’, righteousness”, the
Word of the religion”, obedience' to the Word of the religion’, the sover-
eignty” (of King Gushtasp) (and) of all? the good things* having the seed of
righteousness®, created by Ahura Mazda’).

(89) YO’ paoiry6® athrava’, yo" paoiry6" rathaéshtao”, yo'> paoiryo"*
vastry6'> fshuyas'*. YO" paoiry6'!*® chakhrem” urvaésayat”’ daévaatcha”!
haotat”” mashydatcha™*, yo" paoiryd* stdish® astvaithyao”’, staot”®
ashem” naist*° daévo*', fraorenata” Mazdayasno* Zarathushtrish*
vidaévo* Ahura-tkaésho”.

(90) YO*’ paoiryd* stdish® astvaithyao” vachim*! aokhta” viddyam*
Ahuro-tkaéshem“. Y6* paoiryd* stdish*” astvaithyao* vachim”
framraot® vidoyim*! Ahurdé-tkaéshem™. YO paoiryd  stdish*
astvaithyao™ vispam*’ daévd-datem® vavacha™ ayesnyam®™ avahmyam".
YO” siird® vispO-hujyaitish™ paoiryo-tkaésho® dakhyunam™.

(89) Who’ (i.e. the Prophet Zarathushtra) (was) the first® priest’, warrior’
and (the prosperity-bringing") agriculturist'’. Who!” first'® *°turned”’ the
wheel’? of the daevas”! and (the wicked) men” *?like” (the daevas). Who”
first?> in the corporeal?’ world?’ praised* righteousness” and ““caused the
daevas*! to perish*®; (also who) confessed himself? a Mazda-worshipper’’,
and a follower of the Religion proclaimed by Zarathushtra (i.e. his own)*, an
estranger from the doctrines of the daevas* and the follower of the law of
Ahura Mazda*®.

ail Mamandi, vaokushe, vavarezushe - Perfect participle dative singular, First atmanepanda, and
the last two parasmaipada; root man, vach, verez. For its explanation, see my Avesta Grammar,
page 261-262.

aim Hanghananai hanghanushe - Perfect participle dative singular; former atmanepada and the
latter parasmaipada; root han; “‘to desire, to possess, to gain” (Darmesteter).

ain Or to Gavyodad, i.e. first-created bull.

aio i.e. by eradicating wickedness and irreligiousness, led men to the path of morality and ac-
cording to the dictates of the religion.

aip Haotat (resembling to it, like it) ablative singular of havant (Darmesteter); or if, aotat is
taken, it would mean, “cold-hearted, merciless, or without feelings, cruel”.

aiq Who recited, “Ashem Vohii” and “Naismi daév6” (Darmesteter).


--- Page 250 ---

234 KHORDEH AVESTA

(90) Who*’ (i.e. the Prophet Zarathushtra) first** in the corporeal* world*®
pronounced” the Word*', opposed to the daevas* (and) acting according to
the Law of Ahura Mazda. Who* first*® in the corporeal*® world*’
proclaimed® the Word” opposed to the daevas*! (and) acting according to the
Law of Ahura Mazda®. (Besides) who® first™ in the corporeal** world*
‘declared every*’ (creation) of the daevas** as unworthy of worship™ (and)
adoration’. Who® in (all) the countries (is) the mighty® *‘paoiryo-

tkaesha®, the giver of all comforts of life®.

(91) Yahmi® paiti® vispem® manthrem” ashem”! sravo” visruyata”.
Ahu” ratushcha”® gaéthanam”; staota” ashahe”® yat” mazishtahecha®
vahishtahecha* sraéshtahecha®; paiti-frakhshtacha® daenayao™ yat*
haitinam® vahishtayao*’.

(92) Yim*® isen® Ameshao” Spenta” vispe’! hvare-hazaosha”,
fraoret® frakhshni™ avi mand” zarzdatodit” anghuyat® hacha”,
ahim’ ratimcha! gaéthanam’, staotarem’ ashahe‘ yat® mazishtahecha®
vahishtahecha’ sraéshtahecha’® paiti-frakhshtaremcha’ daénayao’ yat"!
haitinam’” vahishtayao'’.

(91) **To whom*’ (i.e. to Prophet Zarathushtra®’) *“was caused to be
heard” the entire® Holy Spell” (and) the sacred”! verse” (of the Religion).
Who was the ““Ahu” and the Ratu” of (all the) countries”. (Also who was)
the praiser” of the greatest®’, best*', and excellent® righteousness”; (and)
was the expounder® of the best*’ religion of (all) the existing® (religions).

(92) Whom* (i.e. the Prophet Zarathushtra) all°’ the Ameshaspand”,
chose” of one accord with Khorshed yazata”, (i.e. co-workers with one
heart), with full faith and devoted heart™”, as the Ahu'® and Ratu' of (all)
countries’, as the praiser® of the greatest®, best’, and excellent® righteousness’,
and as the expounder?® of the religion’? (which is) the best’? of (all) the
existing (religions).

(93) Yehe™ zathaécha’ vakhshaécha", urvasen” ap6'* urvaraoscha”;
yehe” zathaécha”! vakhshaécha”, ukhshin” 4po* urvaraoscha”™; yehe”®
zathaécha”’ vakhshaécha”* ushtatatem” nimravanta* vispao*! spento-
datao” daman”™.

air Original meaning, “spoke”; vavacha - Perfect Tense third person singular parasmaipada; root
vach - Sanskrit vach.

ais The original meaning: Of the primeval law - faith. This word is used for the Mazda-worship-
pers prior to the Prophet Zarathushtra. Prophet Zarathushtra himself was the first paoiryo-
tkaesha. Its analogy is, nabdnazdishta.

ait Original meaning: “in whom” (locative singular) = yahmi paiti.

aiu i.e. the Prophet was full versed in all the holy and mysterious verses of the Religion and was
perfect in matters of religion.

aiv Ahu, i.e. the temporal lord; ratu, i.e. the high priest; the spiritual leader.


--- Page 251 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 235

(94) Ushta* no* zato* athrava*” yo* Spitamo” Zarathushtro” fra-
no"! yazaite’ zaothraby6® steretd-baresma* zarathushtro*. Idha“
apam” vijasaiti*® vanguhi*” daéna*’ Mazdayasnish*! vispaish* avi™
karshvan™ yaish* hafta®.

(93) In whose" birth’ (i.e. in the birth of the Prophet Zarathushtra) and
growth'® waters'* and plants'® rejoiced'’; in whose” birth’ and growth”
waters” and plants* increased” in whose” birth?’ and growth” all*! the
creations® created by Spenta Mainyu” cried out*, “Hail””’.

Explanation:- On account of being noticed the laws of increasing and
prospering the natural creations of waters, plants, etc., by Lord Zarathushtra,
the entire nature rejoiced.

(94) (The entire nature uttered with joy):-

Hail**! born*® for us** (is) one priest?’ Spitaman Zarathushtra.
Zarathushtra*, the spreader of Baresman“ (in the ceremonies) will now
worship” us*! with libations. Hereafter*’, the good’? Mazda-worshipping*
Religion® will spread“ over® all? the seven*® regions of the earth™ (i.e. in
the entire world).

(95) Idha*’ apam*® Mithro” yo vouru-gaoyaoitish® fradhat®
vispao® fratematato™ dakhvyunam® yaozaintishcha® ramayeiti”. Idha®
Apam Napao® siro” fradhat” vispao” fratematato” dakhvyunam”™
yaozaintishcha”™ nyasaite”.

Maidyodi-maonghahe” Ardstayehe® idha” ashaond* ashimcha*!
fravashimcha” yazamaide*; yo* paoiryo*  Zarathushtrai*®
manthremcha*®’ gishta® sasnaoscha®.

(95) Hereafter*® Mithra yazata®, the lord of wide pastures”, will
increase” the entire’ excellence™ of (our) countries®, and will tranquillize®
the *“revolts®. (Hereafter) the powerful” Apam Napat® will increase”! the

entire” excellence” of (our) countries” and will quell’ the revolts”.

We worship® the holiness*' of the holy*? ““Maidhyo-maongha”, the son
of Arasti® and (his) Fravashi*’; who* first®> listened with attention to* the
Holy Spell®’ of (the Prophet) Zarathushtra® and to the commandments of the
religion”.

(Kardah XXV) (96) Asm6-khvanvatd! ashaond?  fravashim*
yazamaide*; Ashno-khvanvatd° ashaond® fravashim’ yazamaide’;

aiw Or in the sense “excitement, agitation”. Originally this word is present participle feminine:-
provoking (things).

aix The cousin of Holy Zarathushtra, who had become the great helper of the Prophet in the
work of propagating the Zoroastrian Religion. From here up to 110 paras, the names of the help-
ful disciples of the Prophet Zarathushtra occur. Most of these names belong to the age of King
Gushtaspa.


--- Page 252 ---

236 KHORDEH AVESTA

Gavayan6’? ashaond'” fravashim' yazamaide’; Parshatgéush™
Paratahe" ashaond"* fravashim'® yazamaide'’; Vohvastoish'* Snaoyehe”
ashaon6d” fravashim?! yazamaide”; Isvat6™ Varazahe™* ashaond*
fravashim” yazamaide”’.

(97) Saénahe* Ahiim-stit6” ashaon6” fravashim*! yazamaide®; yo”
paoiryo* _satd-aéthryo* frakhshtata*  paiti®? aya*® zema”.
Pereididhayehe® ashaond*! fravashim*” yazamaide*; Usmanarahe“
Paéshatahe * ashaon6o“ fravashim*’ yazamaide*; Vohu-raochangh6d”
Franyehe® ashaono*' fravashim® yazamaide*’; Ash6-raochangho™
Franyehe® ashaono~ fravashim*’ yazamaide*; Varesm6-raochangh6o”
Franyehe® ashaono" fravashim® yazamaide®.

(98) Isat-vastrahe* Zarathushtrdish® ashaond®  fravashim”’
yazamaide®; Urvatat-narahe® Zarathushtrodish” ashaon6d” fravashim”
yazamaide”; Hvare-chithrahe” Zarathushtrdish” ashaond” fravashim”
yazamaide”®; Daéva-tboish” takhmahe*® ashaond*'  fravashim®
yazamaide®; Thrimithwatd* Spitamahe*® ashaono*  fravashim*’
yazamaide*; Daonghahe® Zairitahe’ ashaond’! fravashim”
yazamaide”.

(96) We worship* the Fravashi? of the righteous? Asma khvanvant'; and
the Fravashi’ of the righteous® Ashan-khvanvant*®; we worship’ the
Fravashis'' of the righteous’? Gavayan’ and Parshat-gao'’, (the son) of
Parata'*; we worship” the Fravashis”’ of the righteous”’ Vohvasti!’, (the son)
of Snaoya”’, and Isvant™, (the son) of Varaza™.

(97) We worship” the Fravashi*! of the righteous*’ Saena”’, (the son) of
Ahum-stuta”; who* first** came into prominence® as the possessor of one
hundred disciples** on*’ this** earth*®. We worship* the Fravashis” of the
righteous*' Pereididhaya®’, and Usmanara™, (the son) of Paeshata*’; we also
worship® the Fravashis’ of the righteous*! Vohu-raochangh”, Asho-
raochangh™, and Varesmo-raochangh”, (the sons) of Franya™.

(98) We worship® the Fravashi of the righteous® Isat-vastra™, and the
Fravashi” of the righteous” Urvatat-nara®, with the Fravashi” of the
righteous’® Hvare-chithra’ (or Khorshed-cheher™), (the sons) of (the
Prophet) Zarathushtra”; we worship® the Fravashi® of the righteous®!
Daeva-tbish”, (the son) of Takhma* with the Fravashi*’ of the righteous**
Thrimithwant™, of the family of Spitaman*®; and we worship® the Fravashi””
of the righteous”! Daongha®, (the son) of Zairita”®.

(99) Kavoish™ Vishtaspahe*> ashaond” fravashim®” yazamaide’,
takhmahe” tanu-manthrahe! darshi-draosh' Ahiiryehe? yo? drucha‘*
paurvancha® ashai® rav0’ yaésha*; yo’? drucha’’ paurvancha"™ ashai’?
ravo' vivaédha'. Yo'* bazushcha'’ upastacha’” visata’ ainghao”
daénayao” yat”! Ahurdish” Zarathushtrdish?’.


--- Page 253 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 237

(100) Yo" him’ statam’’ hitém?’ haitim’® uzvazat” hacha*?
hinuivyo*"', ni him*® dasta*‘ maidydishadhem* berezi-razem*
afrakadhavaitim*’ ashaonim*® thrafdham® géushcha” vastrahecha*,
fritham®” géushcha* vastrahecha“.

(99) We worship” the Fravashi of the righteous (King) Vishtaspa®® of the
Kayanian family™, the mighty”, “”Word-incarnate'™, and acting according to
the Laws of Ahura Mazda. Who’ showed" openly the (path) of
righteousness"? with (his) *’stunning" spear.

Explanation:- Its significance is, that King Vishtaspa on account of the
authority of his sovereignty, made the path wide open for the increase of
righteousness, by destroying wickedness, and showed the people what could
be achieved thereby.

(Moreover) who'* (i.e. King Vishtaspa) became'® the arm'® and the
support!” of this’? religion’? (which is) of Ahura Mazda” as revealed by
Zarathushtra*’.

(100) Who*-(i.e. King Vishtaspa) **separated?’ that steadfast, extant’,
holy?” “religion ““from wicked men***! and fixed*?*™ her® ruling® high,
promulgated (it) all around®’, possessed of moral commandments”, sitting
in the middle* (i.e. honoured in the assembly of the people), fostered*’ and

beloved by cattle*’ and pastures*!.*

(101) Zairivarodish* ashaono“ fravashim” yazamaide*;
Yukhtavardish® ashaond™” fravashim*' yazamaide™; Sriraokhshno~
ashaono™ fravashim*® yazamaide™%*; Keresaokhshno*’ ashaond™
fravashim® yazamaide®; Vanarahe” ashaond” fravashim® yazamaide™;
Virazahe® ashaon6d® fravashim®’ yazamaide®; Nijarahe* Savangho”
ashaon6o” fravashim” yazamaide”; Bujasravanghd%  ashaond*
fravashim” yazamaide”; Berezyarshtdish’ ashaond” fravashim*
yazamaide*!; Tizyarshtodish® ashaond®* fravashim* yazamaide*;
Perethwarshtdish* ashaond*’ fravashim® yazamaide®; Vaézyarshtoish”
ashaono”' fravashim” yazamaide”.

aiy 1.e. Whose body is Holy Spell; or whose body is subject to Manthra - Holy Spell.
aiz Original meaning, “rushing forth, advancing forth”.
aja Original meaning, “took away after driven out” (root uz-vaz).

ajb Original meaning, “white” (Sanskrit sita): or “strengthened”, “bound”, root Ai = Sanskrit si
= to bind.

ajc In the original text, “her” (him), i.e. religion.
ajd Hunu = the brood of evil creation; son of wicked descent, hinuiwyo (Geldner).
aje Darmesteter, Original meaning, “doing no harm”.

ajf i.e. the religion which gives the best commandment for the increase (prosperity) of cattle and
agriculture.


--- Page 254 ---

238 KHORDEH AVESTA

(101) We worship** the Fravashi*’ of the righteous** Zairi-vairi* (the
brother of King Vishtaéspa); We worship® the Fravashi*’ of the righteous*®
Yukhta-vairi”; we worship” the Fravashis* of the righteous™ Sriraokhshna™,
and Keresaokhshna’’; we worship™ the Fravashis® of the righteous”
Vanara®', Viraza®, and Nijara®, (the son) of Savangh”; we also worship” the
Fravashis” of the righteous” Bujasravangh”™, Berezyarshti”® and Tizyarshti®;
we worship® the Fravashi** of the righteous*’ Perethvarshti*® with the
Fravashi” of the righteous °! Vaezyarshti”’.

(102) Naptyehe™ ashaon6d”® fravashim®’’ yazamaide”; Vazaspahe™
ashaon6d” fravashim'” yazamaide'; Habaspahe’ ashaonod’ fravashim‘
yazamaide*; Vistaraosh® Naotairyanahe’ ashaond® fravashim? yaza-
maide”; Frash-ham-varetahe! ashaond’ fravashim!-? yazamaide";
Frash6-karahe!® ashaond'® fravashim'’ yazamaide'*; Aterevanaosh”
ashaond” fravashim?! yazamaide”; Aterepatahe”? ashaond”™ fravashim?5
yazamaide”; Ateredatahe?’ ashaond” fravashim”’ yazamaide™; Atere-
khvarenanghd*! ashaond” fravashim®? yazamaide*; Ateresavangho*
ashaond*  fravashim?’ yazamaide**; Aterezantéush*®” _ashaond“’
fravashim‘! yazamaide”; Ateredainghéush*’ ashaond* fravashim”
yazamaide”.

(102) We worship” the Fravashi*® of the righteous Naptya™ with the
Fravashi'” of the righteous” Vazaspa®’®; we worship® the Fravashi* of the
righteous’ Habaspa’, and Gustehem’®, (son) of Nodar’, we worship’ the
Fravashis® of the righteous’? Frashham-vareta'', Frasho-kara!®, Aterevanu”,
and Aterepata”; we worship*’ the Fravashi”’ of the righteous” Ateredata’’,
with the Fravashi®® of the righteous Aterechithra*!, and Atere-
khvarenangh*; we worship? the Fravashi*! of the righteous” Atere-
Savangh*, Atere-zantu*’, and *#Atere-danghu’”.

(103) Hushyaothnahe*®! ashaond”  fravashim*® yazamaide™;
Pishishyaothnahe* ashaon6d*~ fravashim*®’ yazamaide*; Takhmahe?’
Spentd-datahe® ashaond® fravashim® yazamaide®; Bastavardish™
ashaond® fravashim® yazamaide”; Kavarasm6® ashaond® fravashim”
yazamaide”; Frashaoshtrahe” Hvodvahe’ ashaond™  fravashim™
yazamaide”; Jamaspahe” Hvovahe” ashaon6” fravashim®™ yazamaide*';
Avaraoshtroish® ashaond® fravashim™ yazamaide*®,

(103) We worship™ the Fravashi*? of the righteous” Hushyaothna*!; we
worship® the Fravashi*’ of the righteous® Pishishyaothna’’, we worship® the
Fravashi® of the brave’ (and) righteous®! Spento-data® (Aspandyar®) (the
son of King Vistaspa); we worship®’ the Fravashis® of the righteous®

ajg Shams-ul-Ulema Dr. Jivanji Jamshedji Modi regards the names derived from Atere occur-
ring in this para 102 as the sons or grandsons of King Vishtasp or of his nearest descendants.


--- Page 255 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 239

‘*Bastavairi,“ “Gorazam®, “/Frashoshtra”, and Jamaspa” ’ of the family of
Hvova”’; we worship* the Fravashi* of the righteous® *“Avaraoshtri®.

(104) Hushyaothnahe* Frashaoshtrayanahe*’ ashaond* fravashim®
yazamaide”; Khvadaénahe” Frashaoshtrayanahe”. ashaond” frava-
shim™ yazamaide®; Hanghaurusho” Jamaspanahe” ashaono” frava-
shim” yazamaide’; Varshnahe! HanghaurushOish’ ashaon6’ fravashim‘
yazamaide*; Vohu-nemanghd*® Avaraoshtroish’ ashaond® fravashim?
yazamaide"; paitishtatée'' aghanamcha” khvafnanam"™, aghanamcha™
daésanam", aghanamcha” aoifranam”, aghanamcha® pairikanam”.

(104) We worship” the Fravashi*® of the righteous** Hushyaothna®’ and
the Fravashi™, of the righteous*? Khvadaena”!, of the family of Frasha-
ostara”; we worship’ the Fravashi” of the righteous’® Hangha-urvangha”®
(son) of Jamaspa*’; we worship® the Fravashi* of the righteous* Varshna' (the
son) of Hanghaurushi’; in order to withstand" evil-producing” sleep’? (i.e.)
evil'* dreams‘ “apparitions and pairikas'’; we worship" the Fravashi? of the
righteous* Vohu-nemangh* (the son) of Avaraoshtri’.

(105) Manthravakahe” Saimuzoish”' aéthrapatoish” hamidhpat-
dish? ashaond* fravashim* yazamaide*. Yd?’ fraéshtem” usaghanam”
gathro-rayantam®” ashemaoghanam*! anashaonaim? anahunam™
aratunaim™ simanam*  avaschastd-fravashinam*®®  ava-jaghnat”’,
paitishtatée** ashava-karshtahe® tbaéshangho”.

(105) We worship” the Fravashi®> of the righteous** *"Manthravaka” (the
son) of Saimuzi*’, the religious teacher” and the placer of the log of wood or
the sacred fire* (i.e. the priest whose function is to tend the fire in the
Sanctum Sanctorum of the Fire-temple). Who’’ (Manthravaka) in order to
withstand** the evil‘! created” against righteous man* intensely smote the
exceedingly wicked heretics” (possessed of these evil traits), desecrating the
Gathas*’, impious”, having no master*, having no religious leader*™,

ajh Son of Zarir, the brother of King Vishtaspa; according to Shah-Nameh Nastur; the name
should be Bastur; it became Nastur instead of Bastur probably because of one (dot) over, the
Persian letter “be”.

aji Brother of Aspandyar, whom on account of jealousy and enmity, slandered, and caused
Aspandyar to be thrown into prison (Burhane qate); Firdausi regards him as the relative of
Vishtaspa.

ajj Frashaoshtra was the father-in-law of the Prophet Zarathushtra, and was his disciple and a
staunch helper. Jamaspa was the brother of Frashaoshtra and the prime-minister of King
Vishtaspa. For his wisdom, foresight and prescience he was called, “Jamaspa Hakim”.

ajk Name of an illustrious personage married to the daughter of Hvova family.

ajl Harlez. In the sense of the English word, “apparitions”. Professor Westergaard has given in
his Avesta book the word aoiwranam whose meaning is not settled. Darmesteter has derived this
word from root par (Sanskrit par = to fill) and translated, “gluttony” or “indigestion”.

ajm Original meaning of mdnthravaka is the reciter of manthra + vaka; root vach = Sanskrit
vach = to speak.


--- Page 256 ---

240 KHORDEH AVESTA

dreadful** and whose fravashis are to be destroyed*’.

(106) Ashastvo*' Maidhydi-maonghdish?? ashaond“ fravashim
yazamaide*; Avarethrabangho” Rashtare-vaghentdish* ashaond”
fravashim™” yazamaide™'; Budhrahe* Dazgraspdish* ashaono™
fravashim® yazamaide®; zbaurvatd*’ ashaond*  fravashim®
yazamaide”; Karshnahe® zbaurvaithinahe® ashaond® fravashim™
yazamaide®; takhmahe® tanu-manthrahe” darshi-draosh® Ahiiryehe®.

(106) We worship the Fravashi* of the righteous“ Ashastu*!, (the son)
of “"Maidhyo-maongha®; and Avarethrabangh*’, (the son) of Rashtare-
vaghenta*’; we worship® the Fravashi> of the righteous™ Budhra,*” (the son)
of Dazgraspa*’, and the righteous** Zbaurvant*’; we worship® the Fravashi™
of the righteous® Karasna°', (the son) of Zbaurvant®, (who was) strong®,
Word-incarnate®’, mighty-speared® (and) acting according to the doctrine of
Ahura Mazda”.

(107) Yenghe” nmane”™ Ashis Vanguhi”? srira’? khshdithni”
fracharaéta™, kainino” kehrpa” srirayao” ash-amayao” huraodhayao™,
uskat®! yastayao” erezvaithyo® raévat** chithrem*® azatayao*. Yo*’
azgat0® arezayao” havatibya” bazubya”!, tanuye” ravd” aéshishto™;
yo*> azgato” arezayao”’ havaétibya® bazubya”, hamerethem’” paiti'
yuidhishtd’.

(107) In whose” (i.e. Karasana’s) house’! entered’ (or moved about) the
beautiful” (and) shining’ Ashishvangh” in the shape” of a maiden’
(having) beautiful’, exceedingly courageous” good appearance®’, high*!
girt®’, straight®’, brilliant** face*’, and “°noble**. Who*’ (i.e. Karasana Hero)
having rushed forward® (in the field) of battle’? (was) wishing happiness”
for his (own) body”, and who” having rushed forward*® (in the field) of
battle*’ (was) fighting heroically” with (the vigour of) both his arms” against
the opponent’.

(108) Viraspahe? Karsnayanahe‘ ashaond* fravashim® yazamaide’;
Azatahe® Karsnayanahe? ashaond'’  fravashim'™ yazamaide”;
Frayaodhahe® Karsnayanahe™ ashaonod' fravashim’® yazamaide"’;
Vanghéush"® Arshyehe’ ashaon6” fravashim”! yazamaide”; Arshyehe™
vyakhnahe™* yaskerestemahe*> Mazdayasnanam”. Darayat-rathahe™®
ashaon6o* fravashim” yazamaide*’; Frayat-rathahe*! ashaond”
fravashim* yazamaide™“; Skarayat-rathahe* ashaond* fravashim*’
yazamaide*.

(108) We worship’ the Fravashis of the righteous® Viraspa> Azata® and
Frayaodha’’, (the sons) of Karsnaya'*; we also worship~ the Fravashi*! of the
good'® (and) righteous” Arshya’’;

ajn For the explanation of the word Maidhyd-mdaongha, see paragraph 95 of the same yasht.

ajo For its comparison, see Avan yasht, para 64.


--- Page 257 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 241

Explanation: (In the excellence of him who is Arshya it is stated that):

We worship” the Fravashi’’ of the righteous” Arshya'’, most dexterous”
amongst (all) Mazda-worshippers*® (and) the leader of the assembly**. We
worship*® the Fravashis” of the righteous” Darayatratha’’, Frayat-ratha*’,
Skarayat-ratha*>.

(109) Arshavato® ashaond” fravashim“' yazamaide”’; Vyarshavato*
ashaono“ =fravashim* yazamaide*; Paityarshavatd“’ ashaond*
fravashim®” yazamaide™; Amraosh*! ashaon6o” fravashim™ yazamaide™;
Chamraosh® ashaon6™ fravashim*’ yazamaide*; Drathahe® ashaon6d™
fravashim®™ yazamaide”; Paiti-drathahe® ashaond“%  fravashim®
yazamaide®; Paiti-vanghahe” ashaond® fravashim® yazamaide”;
Frashavakhshahe” ashaond” fravashim™ yazamaide“%; Nem6-
vanghéush’”> Vaédhayanghahe” ashaon6” fravashim”™ yazamaide”.

(109) We worship” the Fravashi*! of the righteous*® Arshavant*’, with the
Fravashi* of the righteous’ Vyarshavant*, and Paityarshavant’’; we
worship™ the Fravashis* of the righteous’? Amru*!, Chamru®, and Dratha*;
we worship® the Fravashis® of the righteous“ Paiti-dratha® and
Paitivangha®’; we worship” the Fravashi” of the righteous” Frashavakhsha’’,
and also the the Fravashi® of the righteous” Nemo-vanghu”, (the son) of

Vaedhayangha”’.

(110) Vaésadhahe*’ ashaond*! fravashim® yazamaide*;
Ashavanghéush* Bivandanghahe® ashaond* fravashim*®’ yazamaide*;
Jaré-danghéush® Pairishtirahe” ashaon6”! fravashim” yazamaide”’;
Neremyazdanahe™ Aithwyaosh® ashaond” fravashim” yazamaide”;
Berezishnaosh”Arahe™ ashaon6! fravashim? yazamaide*; Kasupitéush*
Arahe® ashaono® fravashim’ yazamaide®; Frayehe’ ashaono" fravashim"
yazamaide”’; Astvat-eretahe’’ ashaon6" fravashim'* yazamaide"’.

(110) We worship*® the Fravashi®” of the righteous*! Vaesadha*’; we
worship® the Fravashi®’ of the righteous*® “?Ashavanghu™, (the son) of
Bivandangha®; we worship® the Fravashis’ of the righteous”!
‘4Jarodanghu®, (the son) of Pairishtura”, Neremyazda™, (the son) of
Aithyu”, and Berezishnu”, (the son) of Ara'°’; we worship® the Fravashi’ of
the righteous® Kasupitu’*, (the son) of Ara®; the Fravashi'' of the righteous’°
Fraya’; and the Fravashi!> of the righteous'* *"Astvat-ereta!? (i.e. Soshyosh)"*.

(Kardah XXVI) (111) Gaopivanghéush! ashaond? fravashim?
yazamaide*; Ham-barethrovanghvam* takhmahe’® ashaonO’ fravashim®
yazamaide’®; Staothrd-Vahishtahe-Ashahe” ashaond"' fravashim’?
yazamaide’; Pouru-dhakhshtdish'* Khshtavaényehe’>  ashaono'®

ajp High priest of the region called Arezahi (Dr. West).
ajq High priest of the region, called Savahi (Dr. West).
ajr Soshyosh is worshipped in three places (paras 110, 117, 128).


--- Page 258 ---

242 KHORDEH AVESTA

fravashim'’ yazamaide'; khshviwraspanahe’ Khshtavaényehe”’
ashono”! fravashim” yazamaide”’.

(111) We worship* the Fravashis* of the righteous? Gaopivanghu', and
Ham-baretar-vanghvam’*, the valiant®; we worship’ the Fravashis’ of the
righteous! **Staotar-Vahishtahe-Ashahe", Pourudhakhshti'*, (the son) of
Khshtavaena’’; with the Fravashi” of the righteous”! Khshviwraspa’’, (the
son) of Khshtavaena”’.

(112) Ay6-astdish** Pourudhakhshtayanahe’* ashaond** fravashim?’
yazamaide*; Vohvastdish” Pourudhakhshtayanahe”® ashaono*!
fravashim? yazamaide*; Gayadhastdish** Pourudhakhshtayanahe*
ashaono” fravashim*’ yazamaide*; Ashsavazadangho” Pourudhakhsh-
tayanahe” ashaono*' fravashim’ yazamaide*; Urudhaosh* Pouru-
dhakhshtayanahe* ashaono* fravashim*’ yazamaide*; khshathro-
chinangh6” khsh6iwraspanahe™ ashaon6o" fravashim™ yazamaide™.

(112) We worship*® the Fravashi*’ of the righteous” Ayo-asti** we
worship*’ the Fravashi® of the righteous! Vohvasti”, (the son) of Pouru-
dhakhshti*®; we worship*® the Fravashis*” of the righteous*® Gayadhasti™,
‘tA shavazdangh”®, along with the Fravashi“’ of the righteous** Urudhu*, (the
sons) of Pourudhakhshti*; we worship™ the Fravashi® of the righteous*!
Khshathro-chinangh®, (the son) of Khshoiwraspa”’.

(113)  Ashahurahe* Jishtayanahe* ashaono*  fravashim*’
yazamaide*; Frayazentahe® ashaond® fravashim®' yazamaide®;
Frenangho® Frayazentanahe™ ashaond® fravashim® yazamaide”; Jar6-
vanghéush® Frayazentahe® ashaond” fravashim’' yazamaide”;
Ashavazdangh6” Thritahe’ Saizdrdish* ashaond”  fravashim”
yazamaide”; Vohu-raochangho” Varakasanahe® ashaond*' fravashim™
yazamaide®*; Arezanguhato™ Tirahe*® ashaono*  fravashim*’
yazamaide*; Usinemangh6®” ashaon6” fravashim”! yazamaide”.

(113) We worship® the Fravashi*’ of the righteous*® Ashahura™, (the son)
of Jishta®*, with the Fravashi® of the righteous” Frayazenta®; we worship”
the Fravashis® of the righteous® Frenangh®, and, Jiro-vanghu®, (the sons) of
Frayazenta®; we also worship” the Fravashis’’ of the righteous”
A shavazdangh” (and) *Thrita™ (the two sons) of Saizdri®; we worship®
the Fravashi® of the righteous*! Vohu-raochangh” (the son) of Varakasana®;

ajs This distinguished personage became the husband of the well-known woman, Ukhshenti
(See para 140); the verbatim meaning of this name is, “the Praiser of the Best Righteousness”,
the Reciter of “Ashem Vohiti”.

ajt See Avan yasht, paras 72-73.
aju See Avan yasht, paras 72-73.

ajv he victorious of the pretentious Turanian tribe called Danu fighting against the ancient Irani-
ans, see Avan yasht, paras 72-73. It would be better if these two proper names and the word,
“Fravashi” were in dual gender according to the rules of grammar.


--- Page 259 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 243

we worship® the Fravashi®’ of the righteous** Arezanghvant™, (the son) of
Tura®; and the Fravashi*! of the righteous” Usiraemangh”.

(114) Yukhtaspahe*® ashaono™ fravashim® yazamaide”; Asha-
shyaothnahe” Gayadhastayanahe”® ashaon6” fravashim' yazamaide';
Vohu-nemanghd? = Katéush*? ashaond‘ fravashim® yazamaide’;
Vohvazdangho’ Katéush® ashaond’?  fravashim'® yazamaide";
Ashasaredhahe” Ashasairyas" ashaon6d“ fravashim’ yazamaide';
Ashasaredhahe” Jairyas'® ashaond’? fravashim”’ yazamaide”';
Chakhshndish” ashaond* fravashim* yazamaide*; Syavaspdish”®
ashaond”’ fravashim* yazamaide”; Pourushtdish* Kavoish*' ashaond™
fravashim* yazamaide™.

(114) We worship” the Fravashis®® of the righteous Yukhtaspa”’, the
righteous” Asha-shyaothna’’, (the son) of Gayadhasta®’, and Vohu-nemangh’,
(the son) of Katu*®; we worship!’ the Fravashi’® of the righteous’
Vohvazdangh’, (the son) of Katu*; we worship'® the Fravashi’ of the
righteous'* Ashasaredha’’, (the son) of Ashasairyash'*; we also worship”! the
Fravashis”” of the righteous’? Ashasaredha'’’ (the son) of Jairyash’’;
Chakhshni”; Syavaspi”’, and Pourushti*”, (the son) of Kavi*.

(114) Varesmapahe* Janarahe*® ashaond*’ fravashim*® yazamaide”;
Nanarastoish* Paéshatangho*' ashaond” fravashim® yazamaide*;
Zarazdatoish** Paéshatangho* ashaond” fravashim® yazamaide”;
Gaévandish® Vohu-nemanghd*' ashaond~ fravashim* yazamaide™;
Erezvao* Srito-spadao*% ashaonad*’ fravashim® yazamaide™;
Zrayanghao® Spentd-Khratvao® ashaonao® fravashim® yazamaide™;
Varshnoish® Vagerezahe® ashaond” fravashim®  yazamaide®;
Frachyehe” ‘Taurvaétdish’”) ashaond” fravashim™ yazamaide”™;
Vahmaédhatahe*® Manthravakahe” ashaon6” fravashim” yazamaide”;
Ushtrahe® Sadhanangho*' ashaond” fravashim® yazamaide™.

(115) We worship® the Fravashi** of the righteous?’ Varesmapa,** (the
son) of Janara**®; we worship“ the Fravashi* of the righteous Nanarasti*’, (the
son) of Paeshatangh*', and we worship” the Fravashi** of the righteous*’
Zarazdaiti*, (the son) of Paeshatangh**. We worship™ the Fravashis® of the
righteous’ Gaevani™’, ( the son) of Vohu-nemangh*’, Erezva* (and) Sruto-
spada*®; we worship™ the Fravashis® of the righteous? Zrayangh® (and)
Spento-Khratu®'; we worship” the Fravashi® of the righteous®’ Vershni®,
(the son) of Vagereza®; with the Fravashi’’ of the righteous” Frachya”, (the
son) of Taurvaeti’'; we worship” the Fravashis® of the righteous°”
Vahmaedhata”, (the son) of Manthravaka”, and Ushtra*’, (the son) of
Sadhanangh*"'.

(116) Danghu-sritahe® ashaond®* fravashim®’ yazamaide*; Danghu-
fradangho®  ashaond” fravashim®' yazamaide”’; Spodpadho”
Makhshtoish® ashaond* fravashim’> yazamaide”®; Payanghard


--- Page 260 ---

244 KHORDEH AVESTA

Makhshtdish” ashaono”® fravashim” yazamaide'; Ushtazantahe!
ashaonO’ fravashim’ yazamaide‘; Ashasavanghd* ashaond® fravashim’
yazamaide*®; Ashaurvathahe’ ashaon6'’ fravashim' yazamaide';
Haom6-khvarenangh6" ashaono" fravashim'’ yazamaide'’; Varshnahe"”
ashaon6" fravashim” yazamaide”.

(116) We worship® the Fravashis*®’ of the righteous®* Dangu-Sruta*®, and
Danghu-Fradangh®; we worship’® the Fravashi” of the righteous”
Spopadho-raakhshti’?; we worship'® the Fravashi® of the righteous”
Payangharo-makhshti’’; we worship* the Fravashis’ of the righteous?
Ushtazanta', Ashasavangh*, and Ashaurvaetha’; we worship’ the Fravashi'®
of the righteous'* Haomo-Kharenangh’, with the Fravashi’? of the
righteous'* Varshna’’.

(117) Fravahe”! ashaon6” fravashim” yazamaide™*; Usnakahe*
ashaond” fravashim2’ yazamaide”*; Khvanvatd” ashaon6d* fravashim*!
yazamaide’; Daénavazangho* ashaond™ fravashim® yazamaide*;
Arejaonahe*’ ashaonod* fravashim® yazamaide”; Aiwi-khvarenangho"
ashaon6o” fravashim®’ yazamaide; Huyazatahe ashaond fravashim
yazamaide*; Haredhaspahe*” ashaono* fravashim*! yazamaide™;
Pazinagho* ashaono™ fravashim® yazamaide®; Khvakhshathrahe”’
ashaono* fravashim® yazamaide®; Ash6-paoiryehe* ashaond”
fravashim® yazamaide“; Astvat-eretahe® ashaond®  fravashim”
yazamaide®.

(117) We worship™ the Fravashi* of the righteous” Frava?!; we worship”
the Fravashi*’ of the righteous”® Usnaka*; we worship» the Fravashi*! of the
righteous” Khvanvant”, Daenavazangh*®®, Arejaona’’, and  Aiwi-
khvarenangh*'; we worship* the Fravashi*’ of the righteous** Huyazata*; we
worship” the Fravashi*! of the righteous? Haredhaspa”; we worship® the
Fravashi® of the righteous™ Pazinangh*’; we also worship® the Fravashis® of
the righteous’ Khvakhshathra*’, Asho-paoirya®’ and Astvat-ereta® (i.e.
Saoshyant).

(Kardah XXVII) (118) Hugéush! ashaonG’ fravashim? yazamaide’‘;
Anghuyaosh*® ashaono® fravashim’ yazamaide®; Gaurdish’? ashaond"’
fravashim" yazamaide”; Yushtahe'* Gdaurvayanahe’  ashaond'*
fravashim’ yazamaide”; Manzdravanghéush" ashaon6d” fravashim”’
yazamaide”'; Sriravanghéush” ashaon6d™~ fravashim™“ yazamaide”;
Ayutahe” ashaond”’ fravashim”’ yazamaide”’; Sird-yazatahe* ashaond*!
fravashim®” yazamaide®.

(118) We worship* the Fravashi* of the righteous’ Hugao', with the
Fravashi’ of the righteous® Anghuyu’; we worship” the Fravashis'’ of the
righteous’? Gauri’, Yushta'’, (the son) of Gaurva'’, Manzdravanghu’® and,
Sriravanghu”; we worship”? the Fravashi** of the righteous’’ Ayuta’’, along
with the Fravashi® of the righteous*! Suro-yazata*”.


--- Page 261 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 245

(119) Eredhwahe™* ashaond* fravashim* yazamaide*’; Kavoish**
ashaond” fravashim” yazamaide“'; Ukhshano” Vidhisravangho*® diraé-
srutahe“ berezvato* ashaond” fravashim*’” yazamaide*; Vanghu-
dhatahe*® Khvadhatahe” ashaon6™ fravashim®” yazamaide*; Uzyehe™“
Vanghudhatayanahe*® ashaon6o* fravashim*’’ yazamaide*; Frayehe?
ashaon6® fravashim” yazamaide”.

(119) We worship*’ the Fravashi*® of the righteous** Eredhwa™ and we
worship"! the Fravashi*® of the righteous? Kavi**; we worship*® the
Fravashis*’ of the righteous** Ukhshana”, the son of Vidhisravargh* far-
famed“ (or renowned from a long period“) and *“exalted**, Vanghudhata®,
(the son) the Khvadhata®’; we worship*® the Fravashi*’ of the righteous”®
Uzya™, (the son) of Vanghudhata*, together with the Fravashi® of the
righteous” Fraya”’.

(120) Ashem-yenghe-raochao® nama“ ashaon6o® fravashim® yaza-
maide”; Ashem-yenghe-vareza® nama® ashaond” fravashim”™ yaza-
maide”; Ashem-yahmai-Ushta” nama™ ashaond’> fravashim” yaza-
maide”; Yoishtahe’® Frayananam” ashaonod* fravashim®! yazamaide®;
Usmanarahe® Paéshatangho™ Paiti-srirahe*, paitishtatée*’ nafyo-
karshtahe®’ tbaéshangho*.

(120) We worship” the Fravashis® of the righteous (men)* **Ashem-
yenghe-raochangh®, #”Ashem-yenghe-vareza®, and *”Ashem-yahmiai-
ushta”; we worship” the Fravashi*! of the righteous®” Goshta Fryan’*”; (we
worship the Fravashi) of (the ““righteous) Usmanara*’, (the son) of
Paeshatangh* ***Paiti-srira®* in order to withstand*® the evils** caused by near
relatives*’.

(121) Spitdish® Uspasnaosh”® ashaond*! fravashim®” yazamaide’’;
Erezraspahe’* Uspasnaosh °ashaono’® fravashim®’ yazamaide”;
Usadhano” Mazdayasnahe"™ ashaono! fravashim? yazamaide’; Fradat-
vanghéush* Stivaté®> ashaond® fravashim’ yazamaide*®; Raochas-
chaéshmano’ ashaond” fravashim" yazamaide”; Hvare-chaéshmand™
ashaono“ = fravashim'S = yazamaide'’®;—- Frasriitarahe'’ ashaono'®
fravashim’” yazamaide™®; Visriitarahe*' ashaond”  fravashim”

ajw “We worship the Fravashi of Duraésruta, the son of Berezvant.” (Darmesteter)
ajx Its verbatim meaning is “righteousness is his light”.

ajy Its verbatim meaning is “righteousness is his work”.

ajz Its verbatim meaning is “righteousness is his prosperity, welfare.”

aka In the original text these usual words, “ashaono fravashim yazamaide” are omitted. It would
be better to insert them.

akb This personage is different from Paeshatangh, occurring in para 115; the name Paiti-srira
(his father’s name or, literally, “more handsome”) is given in order to distinguish him from that.
Usmanara, the son of this Paeshatangh, must have been a well-known personage for his acts of
compromise in resolving private family discussions or domestic feuds.


--- Page 262 ---

246 KHORDEH AVESTA

yazamaide™*; Beremnahe* ashaon6d* fravashim?’ yazamaide’’;
Visriitahe” ashaon6” fravashim*! yazamaide”.

(121) We worship” the Fravashi” of the righteous”! Spiti®®, we worship”
the Fravashi’’ of the righteous” Erezraspa™, (the sons) of Uspasnu”’, and we
worship)? the Fravashi? of the righteous! Usadhana”, (the son) of
Mazdayasna'”; we worship® the Fravashis’ of the righteous® Fradatvanghu’,
(the son) of Stivat®, Raochao-chaeshman’, Hvarechaeshman'’? and
Frasrutara'’; we worship the Fravashi*? of the righteous” Visrutara’’,

Baremna”’, and Visruta”’.

(122) Hvaspahe* ashaond™ fravashim** yazamaide*; Chathware-
spahe*’ ashaono* fravashim® yazamaide”; DawramaéshOish*! ashaon6d”
fravashim® yazamaide“; Fraoraosahe* Kaoshahe* ashaond”
fravashim® yazamaide”; Frinaspahe™ Kaévahe*! ashaond™ fravashim™
yazamaide™; Fradat-narahe® Gravaratéush® ashaond~’ fravashim*®
yazamaide®; Vohushtrahe® Akhnanghahe” ashaond® fravashim®
yazamaide“; Vivareshvahe® Ainyavahe® ashaond”  fravashim®
yazamaide®.

(122) We worship* the Fravashi*® of the righteous** Hvaspa*’; we
worship” the Fravashi*’ of the righteous** Chathwarespa*’; we worship“ the
Fravashis® of the righteous’? Dawramaeshi*!, Fraoraosa*, the (son of)
Kaosha*’, Frindspa*’, (the son) of Kaeva*', and the Fravashi*® of the
righteous*’ Fradat-nara®, (the son) of Gravaratu*®; we also worship™ the
Fravashi® of the righteous” Vohushtra®, (the son) of Akhnangh*'; with the
Fravashi® of the righteous® Vivareshva®, (the son) of Ainyava®.

(122) Frarazoish” Tirahe’ ashaond” fravashim” yazamaide”;
Stipdish*> Ravatd’ ashaond” fravashim™® yazamaide”; Parshintahe*
Gandrewahe® ashaono”  fravashim® yazamaide*; Avayehe*
Spenghahe® ashaon6d*’ fravashim*® yazamaide*; Aétavahe” Mayavahe"!
ashaon6” fravashim® yazamaide™; Yaétushgéush® Vyatanahe”,
ashaon6d” fravashim® yazamaide”; Garshtahe'” Kavoish' ashaon6?
fravashim’ yazamaide‘.

(123) We worship” the Fravashis” of the righteous” Frarazi”, (the son)
of Tura”, Stipi’> (the son) of Raevant’’, Parshinta®’, (the son) of Gandrewa*’,
and the Fravashi*® of the righteous*’ Avaya® (the son of) Spengha*; together,
we worship” the Fravashis* of the righteous” Aetava” (the son) of

Mayava’!, Yaetush-gao”’, (the son) of Vyata”’, and (the son) of Kavi'.

(124) Pouru-banghahe*® Zaoshahe® ashaond’ fravashim® yazamaide’;
Vohu-datahe” Katahe" ashaond” fravashim™ yazamaide"; Baonghahe’*
Saonghanghahe’’. ashaond’ fravashim'® yazamaide’; Hvarezio”’
Ankasayao?! ashaonao” fravashim™® yazamaide™; Aravaoshtrahe*
Erezavat6 dainghéush*® ashaond””’’ fravashim’®  yazamaide”;


--- Page 263 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 247

Frachithrahe*® Berezavatd*! ashaon6” fravashim*? yazamaide™; Vohu-
peresahe* Ainyavahe” ashaond” fravashim*® yazamaide”.

(124) We worship’ the Fravashi® of the righteous’ Pouru-bangha’, the son
of Zaosha®; we worship'* the Fravashi'? of the righteous’? Vohu-date’®, (the
son) of Kata''; we worship the Fravashi'® of the righteous’? Baongha’> (the
son) of Sdongha'®; we worship the Fravashis”’ of the righteous” *““Hvarez”
and Ankasa”', Aravaoshtra”, (the son) of Erezvat-dainghu’®, Frachithra*®, (the
son) of Berezavant*!; also we worship*®’ the Fravashi** of the righteous*’
Vohu-perese*’, (the son) of Ainyu®.

(125)  Pard-dasmahe* Dashtaghnoish**? Muza*® Muzayao*
dainghéush“ ashaond* fravashim* yazamaide”; Fraturao* Asrutao”
Baéshatasturao” ashaondo*™ fravashim®” yazamaide™*; Avaregéush™
erezavato® Aoighmatasturahe® ashaond*” fravashim* yazamaide”;
Gaomato® Zavand*! Raozdyahe” Raozdyayao® dainghéush™ ashaono®
fravashim®™ yazamaide”; Thritd® Aévo-saredhd-fyushtahe® Tanyehe”
Tanyayao” dainghéush” ashaono” fravashim”™ yazamaide”™.

(125) We worship*’ the Fravashis** of the righteous* Parodasma”, (the
son) of Dashtaghna*', (who is) the inhabitant of Muza® country“, Fratura®
(and) Asruta®’, (the sons) of Baeshatastura®’, with the Fravashi*® of the pure*
and righteous*’ Avaregao™, (the son) of Aoighmatastura®*; we worship” the
Fravashi® of the righteous® Gaomant®, (the son) of Zavana®’, the
“inhabitant of the Raozdya® country™, and the Fravashi™ of Thrita®’, (the
son) of Aevo-saredho-fyushta™, the inhabitant of the Tanya” country”.

(126) Tird-nakathwahe” Uspaéshatanam” Saénanam”™ ashaon6d”
fravashim® yazamaide*'; Utayutodish® Vitkavoish® Zighroish* Saénahe*
ashaon6o® fravashim®’ yazamaide*; Frohakafrahe® Marezishmyehe”
Saénanam®”!' ashaond” fravashim®’ yazamaide™; Varem6-raochao”™
Perethwafsm6” ashaonod” fravashim”® yazamaide”.

(126) We worship*! the Fravashis® of the righteous” Tiro-nakathwa” of
the family of Uspaeshata-Saena’””, Utayuti®’, the son of Vitkavi® (and)
Zighni*™, (the son) of Saena*; we also worship™ the Fravashi® of the
righteous” Fro-hakafra®, (the son) of Marezishmya” of the family of
Saena”!, with the Fravashi®’ of the righteous Varesmo-raochangh”, the son of
Perethwafsma”.

(127) Asha-nemanghao’” Vidat-gavao' Anghuyao? dainghéush*
ashaondo* fravashim®S yazamaide’; Parshat-gavao’ Dazgr0-gavao®

akc These two words are dvandva compound genitive dual; the original forms are Hvareza and
Ankasa.

akd In the original text:- Muzi of the Muza country; Raozdi of the Raozdya country and Tani of
the Tanya country (just as the inhabitant of Surat is called Surti). Muza, Raozdya and Tanya are
likely to be different from some countries under the Iranian subjugation. Nothing is definitely
ascertained about them.


--- Page 264 ---

248 KHORDEH AVESTA

Apakhshirayao’ dainghéush'® ashaonao" fravashim’ yazamaide";
Hufravakhsh' Kahrkananam' ashaono'’ fravashim'’ yazamaide'*;
Akayadhahe” Pudhanam” ashaond”' fravashim” yazamaide”;
Jamaspahe* Aparazatahe ashaond” fravashim?’ yazamaide’’;
Maidhy6-maonghahe” aparazatahe” ashaono*! fravashim”
yazamaide*; Urvatat-narahe* aparazatahe* ashaond* fravashim*”’
yazamaide*,

(127) We worship® the Fravashis* of the righteous* Asha-nemangh'®
(and) Vidat-gao' of the country’ (called) “‘Anghu’; we worship’ the
Fravashis”” of the righteous'’ Parshat-gao’ (and) Dazgro-gao* of Apakhshira’;
we worship!® the Fravashi!’ of the righteous!* “‘Hufravakhsh" of the family
of Kahrka’*, and we worship” the Fravashi” of the righteous”’ Akayadha’® of
the Pudha family”; we worship*® the Fravashis’’ of the righteous”
“sJamaspa™*, Maidhyo-mah”’, and Urvatat-nara* (bora later on**) of later
period.

(128) Raochas-chaéshmano®” ashaond” fravashim*! yazamaide”;
Hvare-chaéshmano* ashaono“ fravashim* yazamaide“; Fradat-khvare-
nangho*” ashaond* fravashim®” yazamaide”; Vidat-khvarenangho*!
ashaond™ fravashim™ yazamaide™“; Vouru-nemanghd* ashaond~
fravashim*’ yazamaide**; Vouru-Savanghd” ashaond® fravashim“
yazamaide”’; Ukhshyat-eretahe® ashaond™ fravashim® yazamaide®;
Ukhshyat-nemangho®” ashaond® fravashim® yazamaide”; Astvat-
eretahe” ashaon6” fravashim” yazamaide”.

(128) We worship? the Fravashis*! of the righteous*? *"Raochas-
chaeshman*’, and Hvare-chaeshman*; we worship® the Fravashi” of the
righteous** Fradat-khvarenangh*’, together with the Fravashis** of Vidat-
khvarenangh*!, Vouru-nemangh* and Vouru-savangh® we also worship® the
Fravashis® of the righteous *“Hoshedarbami®, ““Hoshedarmah®’, and
kSoshyosh”!.

ake Darmesteter; if we take the text, “anghao danghéush” according to Westergaard, it would
mean, “of this country”.

akf Or of Hufravach; only sh of the genitive singular termination is added like narsh.

akg ie. The grandson of Jamaspa or one descended from his family; his lineage. When the
word, aparazata comes with other names, it is to be understood this way. About the first
Jamasp, Mediomah and Urvatat-nara, see paras 95, 98, and 103 of this yasht.

akh During the period of last 57 years of Resurrection, the names of those six great men who are
taking part with Soshyosh are stated in this paragraph from “Raochas-chaéshman” up to “Vouru-
savangh”’. For further details, see my Avesta dictionary.

aki The future prophet, son of Zarathushtra to be born of Srutat-fedhri at the time of Resurrec-
tion.

akj The future prophet, son of Zarathushtra to be born of Vanghu-fedhri at the time of Resurrec -
tion.


--- Page 265 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 249

(Kardah XXVIII) (129) Y6! anghat? Saoshyas* verethrajat nama’
Astvat-eretascha® nama’. Avatha® Saoshyas’, yatha'’ vispem" ahim”
astvantem’ savayat'; avatha, Astvat-eretd, yatha astvao han”
ushtanavao” astvat-aithyejanghem” paitishtat”, paitishtatée™“ bizangro-
chithrayao* druj6”, paitishtatée”’ ashava-karshtahe”* tbaéshangho”.

(129) Who! (i.e. the prophet born of the mother called Eredat-Fedhri
mentioned above) will be revealed (manifest?) as the victorious® Saoshyant
by name’, as well as Astvat-ereta® by name’. (His name) Saoshyant? is for
this reason® that he “will benefit'* the whole corporeal!? world'?. (His
name) Astvat-ereta'® (is) for this reason® that “"he'? will “"resuscitate
(revive) the corporeal! (world) which is perishable”.

Explanation:- (The reason of resuscitation is mentioned below).

In order to withstand “°wicked men” of druj-like nature”, and in order

to withstand the evil” created (in the opposition of) against righteous man”*
(i. e. in order to suppress the evils of the demons, drujas and wicked men)
(that future Prophet Saoshyant will revive the dead in this world).

(Kardah XXIX) (130) Yimahe! Vivanghanahe? ashaon6? fravashim‘
yazamaide® siirahe® pouro-vathwahe’, paitishtatée® ainishtdish? daevo-
frakarshtayaéo", haéchanghascha" avastrahe’,  ithyejanghascha™
marshaonahe".

(131) Thraétaonahe'’ Athuyandish’® ashaond!” fravashim!® yaza-
maide”, paitishtatée”” garenaushcha”! tafnaoshcha” naézahecha” saras-
tdishcha** vavarshydoscha*, paitishtatée*® Azi-karshtahe?’ tbaésh-
angho”*. Aoshnarahe” pouru-jirahe® ashaond*' fravashim® yazamaide*;
Uzvahe* Tumaspanahe* ashaond*  fravashim*’ yazamaide**;
Aghraérathahe® naravahe* ashaond‘' fravashim®? yazamaide*;
Manushchithrahe“ Airyavahe* ashaon6“ fravashim” yazamaide*.

(130) We worship® the Fravashi* of the righteous? (King) Yima', the
valiant®, having a large retinue’, the son of Vivanghana’, for withstanding
draught or currents of air of deadly destruction'’’, created by the Daevas’”.
Which destroy pastures!” (and) means of subsistence’.

akk The son of Holy Zarathushtra and the future prophet, to be born of the mother Eredat-fedhri
at the time of Resurrection. The original meaning of, “astvat-ereta” is, “one who makes the bod-
ily creatures rise up”, i.e. the maker of Resurrection.

akl The original meaning of “Saoshyant” is, “he who will benefit in future”, “the future bene-
factor’, derived from the root su = to benefit. Savayat = Casual.

akm Ha-present participle masculine nominative singular; original form hant + s; root ah =
Sanskrit as-, to be-.

akn Original meaning, “will raise up” the bodily’ and living creatures”. Geldner gives the text
paitishat.

ako Original meaning, “the druj of the brood of the biped”.


--- Page 266 ---

250 KHORDEH AVESTA

(131) We worship” the Fravashi!® of the righteous!” “PFaredun'’, the son
of Athawyan'®, in order to withstand?’ itch?', fever”, “debility”, ague-
fever’, free indulgence of lust”, and the evil?* *““caused by snake?’. We
worship® the Fravashi* of the righteous! *““Aoshnara”, full of intelligence*;
we worship*® the Fravashi*’ of the righteous*® Uzava**, the son of
“'Tehemaspa®, and the Fravashi* of the righteous** Aghraeratha*®, the
““brave*’, with the Fravashi‘” of the righteous*’ Minocheher*, the son of
“Erach*>,

(132) Kavoéish® Kavatahe ashaond* fravashim® yazamaide*;
Kavoish™ Aipivanghéush* ashaono~ fravashim*’ yazamaide*; Kavoish?
Usadhano® ashaon6d” fravashim® yazamaide®; Kavoish* Arshno®
ashaon6d® fravashim®’ yazamaide*; Kavoish® Pisinangho” ashaono”
fravashim” yazamaide”; Kavoish” Byarshand” ashaond” fravashim”
yazamaide®; Kavodish”® Syavarshano*” ashaond*!  fravashim®
yazamaide*; Kavodish** Haosravanghd* ashaond*  fravashim®’
yazamaide*,

(133) Amahecha® paiti®® hutashtahe’', verethraghnahecha” paiti’
Ahuradhatahe™, vanaintyaoscha® paiti®® uparatato”, sanguhascha”®
paiti® husastayao'”, sanguhascha! paiti? amuyamnaydo’, sanguhascha‘*
paiti’ avanemnayao’, hathra vatahecha’ paiti® hamerethanam’.

(132) We worship* the Fravashi* of the righteous*’ Kay” Kobad*°; we
worship* the Fravashi*” of the righteous** Kay™ ““Aipivanghu® (the son of
Kay Kobad), and the Fravashi® of the righteous’ Kay Usadhana®; we
worship® the Fravashi®’ of the righteous® Kay® Arshan®, together with the
Fravashis” of the righteous”! Kay® Pisinang” and Kay” ““Byarshan”; we

akp Here Faredun appears to have been remembered as a physician removing diseases; for further
details, see notes on the Pazend portion of Vanant yasht, in my Khordeh Avesta Ba Maeni.

akq Other meanings of the word naéza are: filthiness, impurity, the point of a needle.

akr Its significance is, evil caused by Zohak (Azi-Dahaka). After coming to the sovereignty by
defeating Zohak, King Faredun destroyed all his wicked doctrines.

aks The Counsellor of Kavi Usa-King Kaikaus, who was eventually killed by the Daevas
(Darmesteter); Jira = Persian zirak = wise, intelligent.

akt The son of Nodar and grandson of King Minocheher.

aku Or possessed of special qualities of humanity (derived from nar). Compare Persian words
insdniyat, mardumi. Know that although Agreras was the brother of Afrasyab was Turanian, he
kept good feelings towards the Iranians. He was the holy and religious person.

akv The youngest son of King Faredun; the names of the remaining two sons Salam and Tura.
akw Son of Kay Kobad (Darmesteter).

akx Four sons of Kay Aipivanghu:- (1) Kay Usadhana (or Kay Usa, i.e. Kay Kaus); (2) Kay Arshan
(Kay Arasha); (3) Kay Pisinangh (Kay Pasina); (4) Kay Byarshan= Kay Vyarash (Bundehesh) = Kay
Armin. Out of them, only Kai Kaus came to the throne of Iran.


--- Page 267 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 251

also worship® the Fravashi® of the righteous*! Kay” *“Siavakhsh®, and
Kay™ Khosravah*®, (the son of Kay Siavakhsh).

(133) (We worship the Fravashis of the above-mentioned great men) for”
(gaining) the well-shapen*! courage®, victory” created by Ahura Mazda™,
for®® conquering®’ superiority’, for” (acquiring) well-taught'”, steadfast’,
and invincible® admonition’ (in any matter whatever), (and) for* (acquiring)
strength for smiting the enemies’ at one stroke’.

Explanation:- Its significance is, that in this yasht, the Fravashis of well-
known men and women are worshipped for one to take a lesson from the
virtues of these men and women, such as their goodness, righteousness,
heroism, altruism and patriotism, and one should try to acquire zealously
their virtues by acting in accordance with them.

(134) Drvahecha"” paiti'' aojanghd'’, khvarenanghascha’ paiti'*
Mazdadhatahe’, tanuyaoscha” paiti'’ drvatatd", asnayaoscha” paiti”
vanghuyao”' frazantoish” dangrayéo* vyakhanayao™“ khshdithnyao”,
spiti-d6oithrayao” 4nz6-bujo”’ hvirayao”*, huzantéush” paiti*’ aparayao*
vyarethyayao” vahishtahe® anghéush™.

(135) Khshathrahecha*® paiti*® banumato*’, daregha-yaoscha*® paiti*®
daregh6-jitdish”, vispanamcha* paiti” ayaptanam*®, vispanamcha“
paiti*® baéshazanam*, paitishtatée’’ yathwam* pairikanamcha”,
sathram®” kaoyam*' karafnamcha”, paitishtatée™ sastd-karshtahe™
tbaéshangho*.

(134) (We worship the Fravashis of the above-mentioned great men) for!
(acquiring) sound’ strength’, glory’? created by Ahura Mazda’; soundness
(of health)'*, for’? (acquiring) the offspring’ having innate wisdom”, good”',
wise”, a chief in the assembly™, shining”’, brilliant-eyed”® (i.e. of sharp
intelligence), relieving from distress’’ and powerful as a hero”’, man of good
intellect” keeping afar’! from irreligiousness** (and) for*® acquiring the
heaven*?* fixed for the religious and well-intelligent person).

(135) (We worship the Fravashis of the above mentioned great men) for**
(acquiring) the brilliant?’ (or majestic*’) sovereignty, for? a long** enduring
life’, for? (acquiring) all*! boons®, all** healing-virtues**, for withstanding“
wizards*, witches”, tyrants’, the Kiks*' and the Karapans” (and) for
withstanding® evil® caused by the tyrants™.

(136) Samahe** Keresaspahe*’ gaesaosh® gadhavarahe® ashaond”
fravashim® yazamaide”; paitishtatée* ughrahe™ bazaush® haena-
yaoscha® perethu ainikayao” perethu-drafhayéo®%, eredhwo-drafsh-
ayio® uzgerepto-drafshayao” khrurem” drafshem” barentayao”;
paitishtatée’ gadhahe’ frakerestd-frasinahe”® simahe” virenjano”®

aky The son of King Kay Kaus and the father of King Kay Khoushrou; Afrasyab being excited
on account of the plottings of his brother Karasivaz, killed him.


--- Page 268 ---

252 KHORDEH AVESTA

anamarezdikahe”, paitishtatée® gadh6-karshtahe*! tbaeshangho”.

(136) We worship the Fravashi® of the righteous” Keresaspa*’, the
curly-haired** mace-bearer®, of the (well-known) Sama family”, in order to
withstand® the army®, of the powerful™ arms®, wide-fronted®’, with wide
raised up banners”, with uplifted cruel banners”, in order to withstand” the
brigand”, who works destruction”, (and who is) dreadful”, man-slaying”
and unmerciful”. Also, in order to withstand® the evil® caused by the
brigands*'.

Explanation:- We worship the Fravashi of the hero Keresaspa in order that
by commemorating his heroic exploits and welfare works we may get
enthusiasm and we may thereby get sufficient courage and strength for
withstanding the destruction rushed forward in the country, or for combating
against the attacks of thieves and robbers.

(137) Akhrirahe*? Haosravanghanahe* ashaond* fravashim*®
yazamaide*’; paitishtatée*® hashidavahe® drvat6” aratoishcha”! gaétho-
merenchyanahe”; Haoshyanghahe” takhmahe™ ashaon6d” fravashim','”®
yazamaide”’; paitishtatée’® Mazainyanam” daévanam!”, varenya-
namcha! drvatam/’, paitishtatée> daévo-karshtahe‘* tbaéshanghO*.

(138) Fradhakhshtodish® Khunbyehe’ ashaond*® fravashim? yaza-
maide"”, paitishtatée" aéshmahe” khrvi-draosh’ aéshmd-varedha-
namcha" drvatam", paitishtatee'® aéshm6-karshtahe” tbaéshangho".

(137) We worship*’ the Fravashi* of the righteous “*Akhrura®’, the son
of Haosravangh™, in order to withstand** *"stinginess®! that deceives the
friend®, wicked” and world-destroying”. We worship” the Fravashi*® of the
valiant™, righteous”> Haoshyangha® in order to withstand® the daevas!” of
Mazandran”, and the wicked people’ of Gilan', also in order to withstand?
the evil’ produced by the daevas’*.

(138) We worship” the Fravashi? of the righteous* Fradhakhshti°, the son
of Khunbya’, in order to withstand’! the daeva Aeshma”’ of cruel weapon’?
and wrath-inciting’* wicked persons’’, and in order to withstand'® the evil!®
caused by anger (or by the Aeshma daeva)!’.

(Kardah XXX) (139) Hvévyao! ashaonyao’ fravashim’ yazamaide‘,
Frenyao* ashaonyaéo® fravashim’ yazamaide®; Thrityao’ ashaonyao”
fravashim" yazamaide”’; Pouruchistayao'’ ashaonyao™ fravashim'
yazamaide'®; Hutaosayao!’ ashaonyaéo'* fravashim” yazamaide”;
Humayao”! ashaonyaio” fravashim™* yazamaide™; Zairichyao*
ashaonyao”’ fravashim”’ yazamaide”; Vispa-taurushya4o” ashaonyao”’
fravashim*' yazamaide’; Ushtavaityao* ashaonyao* fravashim*

akz The friend helping in the heroic adventures of the hero Keresaspa; probably the descendant
of the Sama family.

ala Or excessive greed.


--- Page 269 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 253

yazamaide*; Tushnamaityao*’ ashaonyao* fravashim® yazamaide”.

(139) We worship‘ the Fravashi’ of the righteous? “’Hvovi'; we worship*
the Fravashi’ of the righteous® *“Freni°, and we worship” the Fravashi!! of
the righteous'® Thrity’; we worship’® the Fravashis'> of the righteous’
Pouruchisti!’, ““Hutaosa!’ and **Humaya?'; we also worship*® the Fravashis?’
of the righteous Zairichi*, Vispa-taurushi”, Ushtavaiti®; ‘and

Tushnamaiti>’.

(140) Frenyao*' nairyao” Usinemanghd® ashaonyaéo“ ashaond*
fravashim® yazamaide”’; Frenyao* ndairyao” Frayazantanahe’
ashaonyao*! ashaond” fravashim® yazamaide™; Frenydo* nairyao™
Khshoiwraspanahe*’ ashaonyao* ashaond” fravashim® yazamaide";
Frenyao® nairyao® Gayadhastdish* ashaonyao® ashaond® fravashim”
yazamaide®*; Asabanayao” nairyao” Pourudhakhshtoish” ashaonyao”
ashaon6”™ fravashim™ yazamaide”; Ukhshentyao” nairyao” Staothro
Vahishtahe Ashahe”® ashaonyao” ashaon6” fravashim*! yazamaide™.

(140) We worship*’ the Fravashis” of the righteous Freni“', the wife” of
the righteous*’ ““Usinemangh*, Freni**, the wife? of the righteous”
“hFrayazentana®, Freni®, the wife of the righteous® “‘Khshoiwraspana’,
and “/Freni®, the wife® of the righteous Gayadhasta®. We worship” the
Fravashi™ of the righteous” Asabana®, the wife” of the righteous”
“kPourudhakhshta”, with the Fravashi*! of the righteous” Ukhshenti”, the
wife of the righteous” “'Staotar-vahishtahe-ashahe”.

(141) Kanyao® Vadhutd* ashaonyao* ashaond* fravashim*’

alb Wife of the Prophet Zarathushtra and the daughter of Frashaoshtra.

alc Note that Freni, Thriti and Pouruchisti are the names of the daughters of the Prophet Holy
Zarathushtra.

ald Hutaosa is the wife of King Vishtaspa. In the Shah Nameh she is known by the name
Ketayun.

ale Humaya is the name of the daughter of King Vishtaspa.

alf The original meaning of Tushnamaiti is “contented thought”. The same word occurs in yasna
Ha 43, stanza 15 as two separate words, Tushnd maiti, (= contented thought). In the Kardah
XXX, 1.e. in paras 139-142 the Fravashis of the illustrious wives and girls are worshipped.

alg His Fravashi is worshipped in para 113 of this yasht.
alh Or the wife of the son of Frayazen to;” Wife of Frayazenta”. (Darmesteter).
ali Or the wife of the son of Khshdiwraspa; “wife of Khshoiwraspa”. (Darmesteter).

alj In this para the Fravashis of four different illustrious ladies by name Freni, are worshipped.
Besides, the Fravashis of the husbands of the wives mentioned in this para, being renowned in
acts of the Zoroastrian Religion, are also worshipped, (see paras 111-113 of the yasht).

alk Note that there were five sons of Pourudhakhshti born of the wife Asabana: (1) Ayo-asti; (2)
Vohu-vasti; (3) Gayadhakshti; (4) Ashavazdangha; (5) Urudhu, (see para 112 of this yasht).

all Original meaning is, “Praiser of the Best Righteousness”.


--- Page 270 ---

254 KHORDEH AVESTA

yazamaide® Kanyao” Jaghriidho” ashaonyao” ashaond” fravashim”
yazamaide™; Kanyao” Franghadho” ashaonyao” ashaonod” fravashim
yazamaide’!™; Kanyao' Urodhayantd? ashaonyao* ashaond‘ fravashim*
yazamaide®; Kany4o’ Paésanghanva® ashaonyao’ ashaon6” fravashim"!
yazamaide”’; Hvaredhyao’ ashaonyao' fravashim'* yazamaide'’;
Huchithrayéo” ashaonyao' fravashim’ yazamaide”; Kanukayao”!
ashaonyao~ fravashim’ yazamaide™*; Kanyao* Sritat-Fedhryd”°
ashaonyao”’ fravashim”® yazamaide”.

(141) We worship** the Fravashis*’ of righteous*’ maids*’, “""Vadhuta™,
Jaghrudha”, Franghadha”, “"Urudhayant’, and Paesanghanva*®; we worship'®
the Fravashi!® of the righteous! *°Hvaredhi!’; we worship”’ the Fravashi!? of
the righteous'* Huchithra'’, with the Fravashis*? of Kanuka’', and the
righteous?” maid *?Srutat-Fedhri”.

(142) Kanyao* Vanghu-Fedhry4o*! ashaonyao*  fravashim*
yazamaide™; Kanyao* Eredat-Fedhryao* ashaonyao” fravashim**
yazamaide”; ya“ vispa-taurvairicha"' nama”, avatha* Vispa-taurvairi“,
yatha* ha** tem‘ zizanat*®, yo” vispe taurvayat®' daévaatcha™
tbaéshao* mashya-atcha™, paitishtatée* jahi-karshtahe® tbaéshangho””.

(142) We worship* the Fravashi*’ of the righteous” maid°°, “"Vanghu-
Fedhri*!; we worship® the Fravashi** of the righteous*’ maid*’, *"Eredat-
Fedhri*, (who name is) “*Vispo-taurvairi* for (this reason* that*>) she“ will
give birth*® to that (man)*’, who” in order to withstand* the evil®” caused*®
by Jahi (i.e. evil of the female counterpart) will destroy*! all the malice®
(caused) by the daevas*®, and by (wicked) men™.

(Kardah XXXI) (143) Airyanim! dakhyunam? naram* ashaonam*
fravashayo> yazamaide®; Airyanam’ dakhyunam® nairinam?
ashaoninam” fravashayo" yazamaide’; Tiiryanam'? dakhyunam"™
naram' ashaonam'’ = fravashayo' yazamaide’®; Tuiryanam”
dakhyunam” nairinam?' ashaoninam” fravashayd* yazamaide™;

alm There was no need of the word ashaono associated with this name. The word, ashaonydo is
enough.

aln Grammatically, this word is in masculine gender; it would be better if it would be,
Urudhayantyao like the word Ukhshentydo occurring in the preceding paragraph. Also there is
no need of the word occurring in the preceding paragraph.

alo It is not definitely ascertained whether this lady and the two following were unmarried or
married like the names occurring in the preceding paragraph.

alp The name of the mother of the Prophet Hoshedar Bami, to be born at the time of Resurrec-
tion.

alq The name of the mother of the Prophet Hoshedar Mah, to be born at the time of Resurrec-
tion.

alr The name of the mother of the Prophet Soshyos, to be born at the time of the Resurrection.

als The original meaning of this word is, “the mother destroying all malice”.


--- Page 271 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 255

Sairimanam*® dakhyunam’* naram?’ ashaonam”  fravashayd”
yazamaide”; Sairimanam*! dakhyunaim®” nairinam® ashaoninam™
fravashay6* yazamaide”.

(143) We worship® the Fravashis* of the righteous* men’ and women of
the Iranian' Countries’; we worship'’ the Fravashis’’ of the righteous'® men'*
and women of *"Turanian' Countries'*; and we worship”’ the Fravashis” of
the righteous”* men?’ and women of the *"Sairima”> Countries”*.

(144) Saininam*®’ dakhyunam* naram® ashaonam“” fravashayo*!
yazamaide”’; Saininam*® dakhyunam“  nairinam*® ashaoninam*
fravashay60” yazamaide*; Dahinam®” dakhyunam* naram*! ashaonam~
fravashayo* yazamaide™“; Dahinam*® dakhyunam* nairinam*’
ashaoninam® fravashayo™ yazamaide”.

Vispanam® dakhyunam® naram® ashaonam™  fravashayd®
yazamaide®;  vispanam®” dakhyunam® nairinam® ashaoninam”
fravashayo” yazamaide”; vispaio”? ashaunam™ vanguhish” sirao”
spentao” fravashayo” yazamaide” yao* hacha*! Gayat*? Marethnat* a-

Saoshyantat™ verethraghnat®.

(144) We worship” the Fravashis*! of the righteous” men*®? and women of
“’Saini*’ Countries**, we worship™ the Fravashis* of the righteous” men*!
and women of *“Dahi*” Countries®.

(145) We worship® the Fravashis® of the righteous“ men® and women of
all®' countries’; we worship” all” the good”, heroic (and) beneficent”
Fravashis™® of the righteous (people)” from*’ Gayomard** to®™ the
victorious® Saoshyant™.

(146) Upa*-ti*’-no® idha® yao” ashaonam®! mdshu” isentu”
fravashay6o™, tao’ no” jasentu’’ avanghe”, tao” no! azahuchit' hatd?
thrayente> aiwi-dereshtaish* avebish®; aomna® Ahura Mazda’,
Sraoshacha® ashya’ sira’ manthracha spenta! vidusha”; yo" vidaévo"4
vidaévahe'* ashto'* Mazdao Ahurahe"’; yim'® Zarathushtr6” frerenaot”
hvavantem?'anghve”astvaite”.

(146) May (they) who” (are) the Fravashis™ of the righteous (people)*!

keep love” over® us* here® (i.e. in this world) quickly’ and verily*’! (and)

may they” come”’ to our” help”! (Also) may those” (Fravashis) save* us!,

alt The countries allotted to Tura, the son of Faredun.

alu The countries allotted to Selam the son of Faredun. According to Firdausi these countries
were situated in the West of Iran.

alv i.e. China and the provinces under the subjugation of China.

alw The countries inhabited by nomadic brave people situated in the Eastern direction of Caspi-
an Sea. For its explanation, see my Avesta dictionary.


--- Page 272 ---

256 KHORDEH AVESTA

5 alx,

the living ones* with (their) powerful’ help® *“at the time of calamity'!
(Besides, may those Fravashis be) (our) ““helpers® through Ahura Mazda’,
through the brave’ righteous’ Sraosha yazata®, and through the learned”
?Manthra Spenta!!! Which (Manthra Spenta) is opposed to the doctrines of
daevas'* and the messenger’® of *"*Ahura Mazda'’, whom'’ (the Prophet)
Zarathushtra'® *“’saw with the sincerest vision?®! in the corporeal”? world”.

(147) Aora™* vanguhish?> upa-shaeta® yao’? 4p6d**, yaoscha”
urvarao”, yaoscha*! ashaonam® fravashayo* Idha™ frithao* paiti-
zantao* buyata®’?; ahmya** nmane® idha*® athravano*! dakhyunam”
manyente*® vanghéush“ ashahe* uzgéurvayente® jaste’’ ahmakem*S
avanghe” surao™ yishmakem*' yasnahe” sévishtao~.

(148) Vispanamcha™ dongham*® ashaonam* ashaoninamcha* idha*™®
yazamaide” fravashim®, yaésham®' yashethwatcha®  urvand®
zaoyaoscha“ fravashayo®. Vispanamcha® aongham® ashaonam®
ashaoninamcha” idha”™ yazamaide” fravashim™, yaésham™ n6o™ Ahuro
Mazdao” ashava” yesne”® paiti” vanghd* vaédha*!. Vispanamcha™
aésham® Zarathushtrem*™ paoirim® vahishtem® Ahdirim*’ sisrima*
tkaéshem®.

(147) O ye good” *“waters”., trees*’, and the Fravashis* of the righteous
(people)?! May you ““‘abide “down here! May you be loved*> and
welcomed* here*™ (i.e.) in this** house*’. (O Fravashis!), Here*®, (i.e. in this
house) the priests’! of (various) countries” *"think® of the good“

alx Original meaning, “in calamities”; dzahu is the locative plural of the word azangh.
aly Aomna - present participle nominative plural; root av = Sanskrit av = to help.

alz As an abstract noun, the meaning of “manthra spenta” is, “Holy Spell”, “sacred verses of the
religion”; as a genitive noun its meaning is, “the yazata Marespand”, who is the transmitter of
the sacred verses of the religion from the Creator Ahura Mazda to the Prophet Zarathushtra.
Holy Zarathushtra had reverence for him for this reason.

ama If we consider the word vidaévahe as an epithet of Mazdao Ahurahe, it would mean “op-
ponent of the daeva”.

amb The original meaning is: Whom" Zarathushtra’® considered worthy of respect” like Him-
self”.

amc Before these words ydo, ydoscha occur and the meaning is, “who, and who”, respectively.
If we take the meaning, word by word, it is translated thus:- (you) who (are) waters, and (you)
who (are) trees and (you) who (are) Fravashis.

amd Fravashis in this world are pleased to remain amidst water and fragrant flowers, and for this
reason during the holy Fravartikan days, fresh water and flowers are kept in a sanctified place.

ame i.e. in this house. Original meaning is, “lower, nether’; it is the comparative degree of ava -
avara = aora (by dropping the middle a).

amf i.e. Except goodness and righteousness no other thoughts are brought in the mind. The sig-
nificance of this sentence seems to be, that religious teachers of various Iranian countries, and
virtuous priests who had come out for propagating the religion of Zarathushtra, have stayed in
this house after their return.


--- Page 273 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 257

righteousness”.

O heroic® (and) most beneficent*’ (Fravashis)! for your*! help® (i.e. for
seeking your help) (and) for (your) worship”, our*® hands*’ *"£are lifted up*®
(with entreaty).

(148) We worship” here** every Fravashi® amongst the *™"Fravashis® of
all** righteous (men)** and women*’. Whose! souls® (and) Fravashis®
‘being worthy of praise (are) worthy of reverence“ (or worthy of
invocation™). We worship” here”! every Fravashi’? amongst the Fravashis®
of all righteous (men)”and righteous (women)”. In the invocation” of whom
(i.e. Fravashi) Holy” Ahura Mazda” *“Ihath recognised*! us” as better®®.
Amongst all® these® (righteous men and women) we have heard*’, (the
Prophet) Zarathushtra™ (to be) the foremost®** and the best*® follower of the
doctrine® of Ahura Mazda*’.

(149) Paoiryanam” tkaéshanim*! paoiryanam” sasn6-gisham”,
idha* ashaonam*® ashaoninadmcha”, ahimcha”  daénamcha™®
baodhascha® urvanemcha!™ fravashimcha! yazamaide, yoi> ashai*
vaonare®. Nabanazdishtanim® idha’ ashaonam® ashaoninamcha’,
ahimcha! daénamcha" baodhascha” urvanemcha’ fravashimcha"
yazamaide", ydi'’ ashai'’ vaonare’®.

(149) We worship’ here™ the life’’, intelligence”, soul’ and Fravashi' of
righteous® (men) and righteous** (women) of *"‘the paoiryo-tkaeshas””’,
(and) of the first *“acceptors of the religion’, who* fought with triumph*
for righteousness*. We worship’> here’ the life'®, conscience"’, intelligence’’,
soul’? and Fravashi"* of righteousness*. Also, we worship (men) and (women)
of *“"Nabanazdishta® who’® fought with triumph’ for righteousness’’.

(150) Paoiryan” tkaéshe” yazamaide!, nmananamcha”, visamcha’”’,
zantunamcha™ dakhunamcha”™, yoi** donghare”’ Paoiryan’ tkaéshe”
yazamaide”, nmananamcha*! visamcha* zantunamcha® dakhyu-

amg In the sense of ustdnazasta occurring in the yasna Ha 28.1 and yasna Ha 29.5.
amh The pronoun Gongham (of these) refers to Fravashis.
ami Yashethwat is ablative singular of yashtva - worthy of worship; root yaz = Sanskrit yaj.

amj i.e. as the invocation of the Fravashis was approved by the Creator Ahura Mazda, their in-
vokers are regarded as better in the eyes of the Creator. If the word vangho is taken as a noun, it
is translated thus: in the invocation™ of whom (Fravashi)” Holy” Ahura Mazda” knows*' happi-
ness® (or goodness®’) for us; i.e. in the invocation of the Fravashis Ahura Mazda regards our
happiness as included.

amk i.e. Mazda-worshippers of the age prior to the Prophet Zarathushtra.

aml Original meaning is those who paid attention to righteous education, those who first listened
to the commandments of the religion. Sasna = Sans, shasan = religious education.

amm i.e. Those who have accepted the Religion of the Prophet Zarathushtra, persons born in the
Religion of Zarathushtra; original meaning is, “nearest the navel”; from this it means, “next of
kin’, “nearest relatives” (see Vendidad fargard IV, paras 5-10).


--- Page 274 ---

258 KHORDEH AVESTA

namcha™, yoi* babvare*; Paoiryan*’ tkaéshe*® yazamaide® nmana-
namcha” visamcha*! zantunamcha” dakhyunamcha™®, yoi* henti*.

(151) Paoiryan® tkaéshe” yazamaide“, nmananamcha” visamcha™
zantunamcha*! dakhyunamcha™, nmananghano™, vishano™
zantushan6® dainghushano” asho-anghano*’ manthro-anghano™® urvo-
anghano” vispaishcha® vanghish” vanghushan6™.

19-20

(150) We worship”! the paoiryo-tkaeshas'’’”°of (these) houses”, streets”’,
towns™ and *"countries?>, who** had been?’, who* will be hereafter*®, and
who% exist at present*.

(151) We worship* the paoiryo-tkaeshas***’ of (these) houses”, streets*,

towns*! and countries (with all such characteristics as) *“°worthy of the
town*, the country”, righteousness*’ (or possessed of love of righteousness),
*™Pnossessed of love for the Holy Spell (i.e. sacred verses of the religion)*,
possessed of love for his own soul*® and regarded as worthy” of all®
goodness” in all respects”.

(152) Zarathushtrem® vispahe® anghéush“ astvato*® ahimcha®
ratimcha” paoirimcha® tkaéshem® yazamaide”; hatam” hudas-
temem”, hitam” hukhshathrotemem”, hatam” raévastemem”, hatam”
khvarenanguhastemem”™, hatam” yesnydtemera™”, hatam®! vahmyo-
temem®”, hatam® khshnadthwotemem™, hatam*® frasastétemem®. Y6*’
na ishtascha® yesnyascha” vahmyascha®! vaoche”, yathana™
kahmaichit™ hatam”, ashat® hacha”’ yat® vahishtat”.

(153) Imamcha' zam! y azamaide’, aomcha’ asmanem* yazamaide*;
tacha® vohw’ yazamaide®, ya’ antaresta'’ yesnyacha" vahmyacha”
frayashtva® naire'* ashaone’.

(152) We worship” (the Holy Prophet) Zarathushtra® (who is) the lord
and the leader®’ of the entire® corporeal® world and the ““paoiryo-
tkaesha®®,

Explanation:- (Qualities of the Prophet Zarathushtra are stated below):-
Holy Zarathushtra is the wisest” of (all) living beings”, the best ruler” of

living beings”, the brightest’ and most glorious” of living beings”, most
worthy of worship®’, of adoration’, propitiation®, (and) glorification® of the

amn i.e. The inhabitants in the houses, streets, towns and countries.

amo i.e. Those who add lustre to houses, streets, towns and countries, etc., root han = san. to be
worthy; to have love, to like; vishand = vis + hand; zantushando = zantu + hdano, etc.

amp By means of virtuous and righteous deeds. To have love for his own soul means, to render
his own soul worthy of heaven after death.

amq i.e. Of the ancient faith. Lord Zarathushtra was himself a paoiryo-tkaesha; at the age of 40
he attained the status of the Prophet.


--- Page 275 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT 259

ams¢4

living beings®. (Holy Lord *"Zarathushtra “is known” to us® as beloved®,
worthy of worship” and adoration’! just as® (this can be said) of any man™
(too) amongst the living beings® on account of the best” righteousness***”’.

(153) We worship’ this'” earth'; we worship* the yonder’ sky*; and we
worship® (all) these® "good creations’, standing between (the earth and the
sky), worthy of worship" and adoration’? (which are) worthy of worship’ for
the righteous’* men".

(154) Daitikanamcha aidyunam yat urund yazamaide, ashaonam Aat
urund yazamaide, kud6-zatanamchit naramcha nairinamcha; yaésham
vahehish daénao vanainti va, venghen va, vaonare "va.

(155) Vanentaém*’ vanghentéam* vaonusham® daénosacham”, idha*!
ashaonam®” ashaoninamcha*® ahiimcha“ daénamcha* baodhascha
urvanemcha” fravashimcha* yazamaide”, yoi™ ashai*! vaonare™.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

Yatha Ahi Vairyo 8.

(155) Here*! do we worship” the life**, conscience*, intelligence**, soul*’
and Fravashi*® of those who revere*’, of those who will revere hereafter*® and
of those who *““have revered (*“"“the laws of the Religion) as well as
righteous” (men) and (women) who have studied religious doctrines* (and
of all those) who” fought” with triumph*” for righteousness”.

(156) Ashaundim! fravashindm? ughranim’  aiwithiranam’‘,
ughranam’ varethraghninam’, Paoiry6d-tkaéshanam’ fravashinam’,
nabanazdishtanam? fravashinam"™, fravashayo" khshnitao” ayantu™
ahmya"™ nmane", khshnitao’ vicharentu’’ ahmya"™ nmane”.

(157) Khshnitao” afrinentu?! ahmya” nmane” vanguhim™ Ashim*
khvaparam”; Khshnitao”” parayantu® hacha” ahmat® nmanat*);
staomacha” razarecha* barentu** dathusho* Ahurahe Mazdao*
Ameshanim Spentanam*’; machim** gerezanao” parayantu”, hacha*!
ahmat” nmanat* ahmakemcha“ Mazdayasnanam*.

amr Taking connection with the preceding words, the word yo refers to Zarathushtra.
ams Vaoche- Perfect Tense third person singular, root vach = Sanskrit vach - to speak.
amt Original meaning, “things”, “good things”. Compare Sanskrit vasu.

amu For the translation of this para, see Haftan yasht Large, Kardah V, para 2.

amv Know that in para 154 above, verbs vanainti, venghen, and vaonare have occurred; the
same verbs have occurred in this para in present, future and perfect tense, respectively.

amw The word daéndo occurring in the para 154 above should be taken here.


--- Page 276 ---

260 KHORDEH AVESTA

(156) May the strong*, triumphant’, and victorious® *“Fravashis'' of the
righteous (people)! amongst the paoiryo-tkaeshas’ and Nabdanazdishta’
come’ (and) being pleased'® may move about in this'* house’!

(157) May those Fravashis mentioned above “being pleased” *"’ask the
blessings”! for self-supporting’ Ashishvangh’**> in this’? house”. (Moreover)
may (those Fravashis) being pleased*’ depart** from” this*® house*'! and may
they carry** (our) hymns of praise and worship*’ (in presence) of the
Creator*> Ahura Mazda** (and) the Amesha Spentas*’! May they *“not*®
depart” complaining” (i.e. displeased) from*! this*? house* of us“, the
Mazda-worshippers*.

(To recite in a low tone) Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum,
mardum sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin
mazdayasnan agahi Astavani neki rasanad aedin bad. (To recite aloud)
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami ashaundim
fravashinam ughranam aiwithirandm Paoiryotkaéshanam fravashinam
nabanazdishtanam fravashinam. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem, Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje Khoreh awazayad Ardafravash berasad, amavand pirozgar
amavandi pirozgari. Dad din beh Mazdayasn4an Agahi ravai goafrangani
bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man 4no 4awayad shudan, man 4no
awayad shudan, man 4no 4wayad shudan; ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

(Facing the South:) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade Zarathushti.
Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Stra Anahite ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

Ashaunam vanguhish siirao spentao fravashayOd yazamaide. Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ardafravash beresad. Ashem Vohi 1.

amx In the original text there is, “the Fravashis amongst of the righteous (people)”.
amy Or above-mentioned those Fravashis being pleased.

amz i.e. Shower such blessings that this house may be full of righteousness, happiness and
riches. Note that Ashishvangh is the yazata presiding over wealth and happiness.

ana The original meaning of mdchim is, “not anyone”.


--- Page 277 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 261

BEHERAM YASHT
Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdan Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini gorje khoreh
awazayad. Beheram yazad pirozgar dushman-zadar, amahe hutashtahe
berasad.*"”

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum az _ harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa getiI manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunshani, tani
ravani geti mmOani, okhe awakhsh pasheman, pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazd4o, tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi ashem Ashem Vohii
3,ane

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévé Ahura-tkaesho (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Verethraghnahe
Ahuradhatahe vanaintyaoscha uparatatd, *“khshnaothra yasnaicha
vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha, Yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota
fra-me mrite, atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti.

(Kardah I) (1) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem? yazamaide’, Peresat*
Zarathushtr6> Ahurem Mazdam°, Ahura Mazda’, mainyd® spénishta’,
datare’ gaéthenam" astvaitinam” ashaum'. KO" asti'’ mainyavanam"®
yazatanam”’ zayotemd'’. Aat!? mraot?” Ahurd Mazdao”! Verethraghno”
Ahuradhato* Spitama™ Zarathushtra”®. (2) “““Ahmai®* paoiry6”’ ajasat”®
vazemno”, Verethraghno” Ahuradhato*', vatahe” kehrpa* dareshdish™,
srirahe* Mazdadhatahe*, vohi*’ khvarend*® Mazdadhatem”, barat*,
khvarend“ Mazdadhatem”, baéshazem* uta amemcha*.

(1) We praise* Beheram yazata' created by Ahura Mazda’. (The Prophet)
Zarathushtra> asked* Ahura Mazda*; O Ahura Mazda’, Most Beneficent?
Spirit®, Creator’? of Corporeal'? world! and righteous!*! Who" is'> the “most
victorious'* amongst the Spiritual’? yazatas'’?” Ahura Mazda said”: O
Spitaman™ Zarathushtra*! (it is) Beheram” (yazata) created by Ahura
Mazda.”

anb i.e. May the victorious and the smiter of enemy Beheram yazad and well-made Ama (i.e.
Yazata presiding over courage) come (unto my help)!

anc For its translation see Ahura Mazda Khodae.

and i.e. For the worship of Beheram yazad created by Ahura Mazda and Vananti Uparatat, (i.e.
yazata presiding over victorious ascendency) pre-eminent Yazata, and for his praise, etc. (see
Khorshed Nyayesh, para. 10.)

ane Dr. Geldner takes this second paragraph in verse form of 7 lines.

anf “Best-armed” (Spiegel, Harlez and Darmesteter).


--- Page 278 ---

262 KHORDEH AVESTA

(2) Unto him?* (who worships and ask for his help). Beheram* (yazata)
goes”* for the first time”’ in the “"shape** of a strong™ and beautiful*> wind,
and bears“ the good” light*’, glory*', the healing remedy’, and“ courage*.

ang

(3) Aat ahmai‘? amavastemd“, ama” ahmi* amavastemd*,
verethra” ahmi** verethravastem6™; khvarenangha*® ahmi** khvare-
nanguhastem6*, yana*® ahmi® yanavastem6, saoka®' ahmi® saokavas-
temd®, baéshaza™ ahmi® baéshazyotemd™. (4) Aat®” tbaéshad® taurva-
yeni® vispanam” tbaéshavatam”'!, tbaéshao” daévaniam” mashyanam-
cha”, yathwam” pairikanamcha”, sathram” kaoyam”™ karafnamcha”.

(3) (the) Most courageous*® (Beheram yazata) then** (speaks) unto him

(i.e. seeker for help)*’: I am® the most courageous”! in courage”, I am* the
most victorious™ in victory”, I am* the most glorious*’ in glory*’; I am* the
most favouring” in favour®’, I am® the most profitable® in profit®, I am® the
most health-giving® in health.

(4) Then I will destroy” the evils® of all’ the tormentors”, (and)
demons”, men”, of the wizards”, the witches”, the tyrants”, the Kiks and
the *"Karaps.

(5) Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna
Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem. zaothrabyd Verethraghnem Ahura-
dhatem yazamaide, “‘yaish dataish paoiryaish Ahurahe. Haomayd gava
baresmana, hizvo-danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha,
zaothrabyascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyod.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(5) On account of his' splendour* and glory? I worship° that* Behram
(yazata)’ created by Ahura Mazda® with the audible® (or famous) yasna’. We
worship’? with libations'® Behram (yazata)'! created by Ahura Mazda”?
according to the first!® laws!° of Ahura Mazda!’.

(Kardah ID) (6) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide. Peresat
Zarathushtrd Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda Mainyod Spénishta,
datare gaéthnam astvaitindm ashaum. KO asti mainyavanam yazatanam
zayotemd. Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdao, Verethraghnd Ahuradhato

ang Imperfect tense in the sense of the present tense, see Avesta Grammar, page 305.

anh To the man who worships Beheram yazata with a sincere heart and asks his help in times of
difficulties, Behram yazata goes in different shapes on different occasions for giving him victory
by casting away his difficulty. These different forms are described in the first ten kardas of this
yasht.

ani For the explanation of the words Kik and Karapa, see glossary.

anj Yaish dataish paoiryaish Ahurahe - these words occur in yasna Ha 46.15 in the Gathic
form:- yaish dataish paoruyaish Ahurahya.


--- Page 279 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 263

Spitama *"*Zarathushtra. (7) Ahmai?’ bityd?’ ajasat?® vazemnd”
Verethraghno” Ahuradhato" géush? kehrpa* arshanahe™ srirahe*,
zairi-gaoshahe*, zarany0-sravahe”’, yim*®* upairi® sruye® sinat*’ amo”
hutashtd* huraodho“. Verethraghno* Ahuradhato*. Avatha*’ ajasat*®
vohii®” khvarend* Mazdadhatem*!, barat” khvareno* Mazdadhatem™,
baéshazem* uta** amemcha*’.

(7) Unto him’® (who worships Beheram yazata and asks for his help)
Beheram” (yazata) created by Ahura Mazda*! goes” running” for the second
time?’ in the shape* of a beautiful** bull**** with yellow ears** and golden
horns*’. Upon*’ those horns* has sat*’ the well-shapen* (and) beautiful
Ama” (i.e. courage). In this way*’ (i.e. in the shape of a beautiful bull)
Beheram* (yazata) created by Ahura Mazda“ (who) bears®® the good”
light®, the glory*’ and the healing remedy, also courage,’ comes up* (for
the help of that person).

Aat ahmdi amavastemd, ama ahmi amavastemé, verethra ahmi
verethravastemd, khvarenangha ahmi khvarenanguhastemd, yana ahmi
yanavastemd, saoka ahmi saokavastem0, baéshaza ahmi baéshazydtem0.
Aat tbaeshao taurvayeni vispanam tbaeshavatam, tbaeshao daevanam
mashyanamcha, yathwam_ pairikandmcha, sathram kaoyam
karafnamcha.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *"Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah III) (8) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide. Peresat
Zarathushtrd Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda Mainyo Spénishta datare
gaethanam astvaitinadm ashaum. KO asti mainyavanim yazatanim
zayotemd. Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdao, Verethraghnd Ahuradhato
Spitama Zarathushtra. (9) Ahmai®* thrityd’?? Ajasat’®? vazemnod”
Verethraghno*” Ahuradhatd*” aspahe* kehrpa®’ aurushahe™, srirahe*,
zairi-gaoshahe*, zarany6-aiwidanahe” yim* upairi® ainikem* sinat*',
amo” hutashtd* huraodhd“, Verethraghno* *“"Ahuradhato”. Avatha”’
ajasat® vohu” khvareno* Mazdadhatem*', barat khvarend™*
Mazdadhatem™, baéshazem* uta** amemcha*”’.

ank For its translation, see Karda 1 of this yasht.
anl For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.

anm Dr. Geldner takes paragraph 9 up to here in the verse-form of 8 lines.


--- Page 280 ---

264 KHORDEH AVESTA

(9) Unto him’® (who worships Beheram yazata and asks for his help)
Beheram*’ (yazata) created by Ahura Mazda*! goes” for the third time?’
running” in the shape*® of a white (or crimson)™ beautiful** horse*, with
yellow ears*® and *""a golden caparison*’. Upon®’ the “°edge*’ of which has
sat’ the well-shapen® (and) beautiful’ Ama® (i.e. courage). In this way*’
Beheram* (yazata) created by Ahura Mazda“ (who) beans* good” lustre”,
glory’, healing remedy**, and courage’, comes up* (for the help of that
person).

Aat ahmdi amavastemd, ama ahmi amavastemé, verethra ahmi
verethravastemd, khvarenangha ahmi khvarenanguhastemd, yana ahmi
yanavastemd, saoka ahmi saokavastem0, baéshaza ahmi baéshazydtem0.
Aat tbaeshao taurvayeni vispanam tbaeshavatam, tbaeshao daevanam
mashyanamcha, yathwam_ pairikandmcha, sathram kaoyam
karafnamcha.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *’Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah IV) (10) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide. Peresat
Zarathushtro Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda, Mainyod Spénishta,
datare gatthanadm astvaitinam ashaum. KO asti mainyavanam
yazatanam zaydtemd. Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdao, Verethraghnd
Ahuradhato Spitama “‘Zarathushtra. (11) ““Ahmai”* tiiry6?’ ajasat”
vazemno”, Verethraghno*” Ahuradhato*', ushtrahe?® kehrpa®
adhairyaosh™, dadansaosh* aiwi-tachinahe*, urvatd*’ frasparanahe*®
gaéthaush® mashyo-vanghahe”.

(11) (Unto him who worships Beheram yazata and asks for his help),
Beheram*’ yazata created by Ahura Mazda*! goes** for the fourth time?’ in
the shape*? of a camel” burden-bearing™, tameable*, swiftly-running®,

ann With a golden caparison (Darmesteter). For its analogy, see Tir yasht paragraphs 18 and 46.
ano Or upon the forehead or face of which (horse). Sanskrit anika.

anp For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.

anq For its translation, see Karda 1 of Beheram yasht.

anr Dr. Geldner takes this para 11 in the verse form of six lines.


--- Page 281 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 265

ans

strong*’, stamping forwards** (or having strong steps**), “carrying the
goods of men“.

(12) YO*! arshnam” frangharezantam* mazishtem“ aojo* abaraiti*,
mazishtemcha”’ 4amananghem*. Yo” khshathrishva” avaiti®'! avao™ zi
khshathrish™“ hupatétemao*, yao ushtro®” paiti*® vadhairish®, ash-
bazaush®, stvi-kaofo", smarshn6°-daéma® jirdsard™ raéva®, berezo”,
amavao”. (13) Yam® he® diraé-sikem” diire” frazavaiti” hitahe”,
tathryam” aipi khshapanem’’, yo” kafem” aipi-spayeiti”® spaétitem”,
upa vaghdhanem® hukhshnaothre* hupaitishtane®. Y6* hishtaiti*
vididhavao*, yatha® sasta®’ hamokhshathro*. Avatha® djasat” vohi”!
khvarend” Mazdadhatem® barat’ khvarend* Mazdadhatem”,
baéshazem”’ uta®® amemcha”.

(12) Who*! (i.e. Beheram yazata coming in the shape of a camel)
maintains the greatest’ strength* and excitement*® amongst the strong
male (animals)*’. When he helps those *“females*’, they are best-protected™.

(13) (It is) the burden-bearing*’, possessed of powerful shoulders®, large-
humped”, ““quick®-eyed®, intelligent-headed™ (or  sharp-witted™),
handsome, tall® and courageous” camel*’ (i.e. Beheram yazata) whom (i.e.
female camel) he protects**. His® “piercing look” *“goes” afar”! (like that)
of a horse” in the dark” night”. And who” standing upon his strong
“"Yknees*! and stout legs* throws” white” foam” on his head®’. In this way”
(i.e. in the shape of a camel) (Beheram yazata created by Ahura Mazda who)
bears™ good”! lustre” glory’, healing remedy*’, and** courage”, comes up”
(for the help of that person).

Aat ahmdi amavastemd, ama ahmi amavastemé, verethra ahmi
verethravastemd, khvarenangha ahmi khvarenanguhastemd, yana ahmi
yanavastemd, saoka ahmi saokavastem0, baéshaza ahmi baéshazydtem0.
Aat tbaeshao taurvayeni vispanam tbaeshavatam, tbaeshao daevanam

ans Professor Darmesteter translates it “long-haired”.

ant Or residing with man, social (root vas = to dwell). “Domesticated, of the house” (Professor
Harlez). Taking the word as “gaésaush” instead of “gaéthaush”’.

anu An indirect suggestion may be taken as Female Camel.
anv Professor Darmesteter. “Bearded” (Professor Harlez); Sanskrit shmasru = beard.
anw i.e. Just as a horse can see afar in the dark night (see Karda 12 of this yasht).

anx Root fra-ju = Skt. pra-ju = to go forward, to hasten. If we take “aétahe” like Dr. Geldner in-
stead of “hitahe”, it can be translated as:- He has the piercing look which can penetrate afar in
the dark night.

any The meaning of “hu-khshnaothra” is also “very pleased”. But in the third kardah of Srosh
yasht Vadi the word akhshnushcha in the sense of “knee” has occurred. I have felt it proper to
take that meaning here. In these two places “khshnu” and “khshnao” instead of “znu” have oc-
curred. Amongst the characteristics of a good camel the strong knee and stout legs are very es-
sential.


--- Page 282 ---

266 KHORDEH AVESTA

mashyanamcha, yathwam_ pairikandmcha, sathram kaoyam
karafnamcha.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *“Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah V) (14) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide. Peresat
Zarathushtrd Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda mainyd spénishta, datare
gatthanam astvaitinadm ashaum. KO asti mainyavanim yazatanim
zayotemd. Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdao, Verethraghnd Ahuradhato
Spitama *“Zarathushtra. (15) Ahmai”’ pukhdh6”’ ajasat® vazemnd”,
Verethraghno*” Ahuradhato*!, hukehrpa®” varazahe*, paiti-eren6™ tizi-
danstrahe*, arshnod°** tizi-asurahe*’, hakerat-jan6°* varazahe, anu-
poithwahe* grantahe*!, parshvanikahe’? takhmahe*®, yikhdahe“
hnairi-vazahe®, Avatha® ajasat? vohi** khvarend” Mazdadhatem™,
barat*! khvarend” Mazdadhatem*™, baéshazem* uta*> amemcha”.

(15) Unto him” (who worships Beheram yazata and asks for his help) for
the fifth time’’, Beheram*’ (yazata) created by Ahura Mazda*!' goes”
moving” in the **good shape® of a *“boar® opposing** (or attacking’),
sharp-toothed*’, valiant*®, with sharp-hoofs*’, smiting at once**, being
moderately fat*®, wrathful*', smiting the rows of the army”, strong®, strong-
bodied“, rushing all around?* In this way*® (i.e. in the shape of a boar)
(Beheram yazata created by Ahura Mazda who) bears*’ good* lustre*,
glory” healing remedy™, also* courage*’, comes up*’ (for the help of that
person).

Aat ahmdi amavastemd, ama ahmi amavastemé, verethra ahmi
verethravastemd, khvarenangha ahmi khvarenanguhastemd, yana ahmi
yanavastemd, saoka ahmi saokavastem0, baéshaza ahmi baéshazydtem0.
Aat tbaeshao taurvayeni vispanam tbaeshavatam, tbaeshao daevanam
mashyanamcha, yathwam_ pairikandmcha, sathram kaoyam

anz For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.

aoa For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.

aob Dr. Geldner takes para 15 up to here in the verse-form of nine lines.
aoc In the original text this word occurs twice (vide 39" word).

aod Taking “hu kehrpa” according to Geldner if we compare hu (Sanskrit shu, su) meaning “a
swine”, the meaning of “hu....varazahe” then would be “wild bear, boar- pig”. For its analogy,
see Meher yasht, para 70.


--- Page 283 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 267

karafnamcha.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *°Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah VI) (16) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide. Peresat
Zarathushtro Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda, mainyo spénishta,
datare gatthandm astvaitindm ashaum. KO asti mainyavanam
yazatanaim zaydtemd. Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdao, Verethraghnd
Ahuradhato Spitama *“Zarathushtra. (17) Ahmai®* khshtv62’ ajasat”
vazemno”, Verethraghno*” Ahuradhato*' narsh®? kehrpa® pancha-
dasangho*™ khshaétahe* spiti-ddithrahe®*, kasu-pashnahe*’ *srirahe*®.
Avatha® ajasat® vohi*' khvareno” Mazdadhatem*®, barat“ khvareno*
Mazdadhatem“”, baéshazem“* uta*® amemcha”.

(17) Unto him*’ (who worships Beheram yazata and asks for his help),
for the sixth time”’ he goes” running” in the shape* of a beautiful*® man” of
*hfifteen (years of age), handsome*, with shining eyes*’, small heels*”. In
this way*? (i.e. in the shape of a beautiful man), (Beheram yazata created by
Ahura Mazda who) bears“ good"! lustre”, glory* healing remedy*’, and“
courage”’, comes up” (for the help of that person).

Aat ahmdi amavastemd, ama ahmi amavastemé, verethra ahmi
verethravastemd, khvarenangha ahmi khvarenanguhastemd, yana ahmi
yanavastemd, saoka ahmi saokavastem0, baéshaza ahmi baéshazydtem0.
Aat tbaeshao taurvayeni vispanam tbaeshavatam, tbaeshao daevanam
mashyanamcha, yathwam_ pairikandmcha, sathram kaoyam
karafnamcha.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *“Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-

aoe For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.
aof For its translation, see Karda 1 of this yasht.
aog Dr. Geldner takes para 17 up to here in the verse form of five lines.

aoh In the age of the Avesta, the age of 15 was considered to be the age of the blossoming of
youth; see yasna Ha IX para 5; Tir yasht para 13.

aoi For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.


--- Page 284 ---

268 KHORDEH AVESTA

byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah VII) (18) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide. Peresat
Zarathushtrd Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda mainyd spénishta, datare
gatthanam astvaitindm ashadum. KO asti mainyavanim yazatanam
zayotemd. Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdad, Verethraghnd Ahuradhato
Spitama Zarathushtra. (19) Ahmai’® haptathd”’ ajasat?® vazemnod”,
Verethraghno*” Ahuradhato*!, mereghahe? kehrpa* vareghnahe*
urvato* adhara-naemat®. Pishato*”’ upara-naemat**. YO” vayam” asti*!
asisht6”, renjisht6* fravazemnanam™. (20) H6* aévo* ushtanavatam””’,
ishva* vasma” apayeiti™; haschit®' va nodit* va yatchit™ vazaitis
hvastem™, yo*’ vazaiti® zarshyamno”; aghram™ usaitim® ushaonghem”,
akhshafni® khshafnim™ isemn6®, asiiri® sairim ishemnd®. (21)
Vigatho® marezat” kaofanam”, bareshnavd marezat” gairinam”™,
jafnavo™ marezat” raonam”, saénish” marezat” urvaranam®, vayam*!
vachim” *“susrushemnd*. Avatha* ajasat®® voha** khvarend*’
Mazdadhatem*, barat® khvarend” Mazdadhatem”, baéshazem” uta”?
amemcha™,

(19) Unto him” (who worships Beheram yazata and asks for his help) for
the seventh time?’ goes”* flying” in the shape® of a bird,” *“fluttering the
wings*’, stout® in the lower part and *“wounding*’ in the upper part*®.
Who*® (i.e. the bird) is swifter* than (all other) birds*® and is lightest®
amongst the flying ones’. (20) He* *"alone*’ amongst the living creatures*’
goes quickly” like an arrow**. None other’, but only that™ bird goes
quickly* at the time of first® glittering® dawn”, wishing® darkness™ to be
no more dark® and wishing® “weapon for those without weapons”.

(21) (That bird) desiring to hear*? the sweet voice®* of (other) birds*®!
goes” *up to the tops™ of the hills”, to the summits” of the mountains”,

ao,

aoj Dr. Geldner takes para 19 in the verse-form of seven lines, para 20 in the verse form of 8
lines and para 21 up to the word Susrushemn6 in the verse- form of 5 lines respectively.

aok It’s another form is varenjanahe (See para 35 of this yasht). In the shape of a bird (called)
Varaghna (Harlez and Darmeseter); varaghana = valak (Pahlavi) = Koldg (Persian)=crow,
raven.

aol Expanded from below and contracted from upward (Darmesteter).
aom i.e. Beheram yazata in the shape of a bird mentioned in this paragraph.

aon Sura = Sanskrit shula = weapon. If we compare the word sura with the Sanskrit shura
(=Sun), its translation can be “he goes wishing the twilight before dawn full brilliance”.

aoo The English meaning of marezat should be taken in the sense of touch; Sanskrit root marz.

aop Side, flank” (Harlez; lonely place (Darmesteter). Possibly the word vigatho may be the ab-
breviated form of vigdtaw6 or vigathwo (Second person plural of vigatu).


--- Page 285 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 269

into the depths” of the valleys”, (and) up to the tops” of the trees®°. In this
way™ (Beheram Yazata created by Ahura Mazda who) bears” good* lustre*’
glory”, healing remedy”, and® courage, comes up® (for the help of that
person).

Aat ahmdi amavastemd, ama ahmi amavastemé, verethra ahmi
verethravastemd, khvarenangha ahmi khvarenanguhastemd, yana ahmi
yanavastemd, saoka ahmi saokavastem0, baéshaza ahmi baéshazydtem0.
Aat tbaeshao taurvayeni vispanam tbaeshavatam, tbaeshao daevanam
mashyanamcha, yathwam_ pairikandmcha, sathram kaoyam
karafnamcha.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish **Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah VIII) (22) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide.
Peresat Zarathushtro Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda, mainyd
spénishta, datare gaéthandam astvaitinadm ashaum. KO asti mainyavanim
yazatanaim zaydtemd. Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdad, Verethraghnd
Ahuradhato, Spitama Zarathushtra. (23) Ahmai”’ ashtemd”* Ajasat”
vazemno”, Verethraghnd*! Ahuradhato” maéshahe® kehrpa™
aurunahe*, srirahe*® *“nivashtaké-sravahe*’. Avatha*® ajasat® vohi
khvarend“" Mazdadhatem®’, barat*® khvarend“ Mazdadhatem*,
baéshazem* uta”’ amemcha*,

(23) Unto him”’ (who worships Beheram yazata and asks for his help) for
the eighth time*® goes” moving* in the shape of a wild ram, beautiful, *“with
horns bent downwards’. In this way (i.e. Beheram yazata created by Ahura
Mazda who) bears* good” lustre*! glory“, healing remedy*®, also*’ courage,
comes up (for the help of that person).

Aat ahmdi amavastemd, ama ahmi amavastemé, verethra ahmi
verethravastemd, khvarenangha ahmi khvarenanguhastemd, yana ahmi
yanavastemd, saoka ahmi saokavastem0, baéshaza ahmi baéshazydtem0.
Aat tbaeshao taurvayeni vispanam tbaeshavatam, tbaeshao daevanam

aoq For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.
aor Dr. Geldner takes para 23 up to this in the verse form of four lines.

aos Nivashtaka-ni=down; vashta-gashteh, gardideh (Persian)=turned, bent, root varet = Lat.
Vertere = to turn; another form of varet is vash; “t” is changed to “sh”; e.g. peretu = peshu=
bridge; vash + ta = vashta.


--- Page 286 ---

270 KHORDEH AVESTA

mashyanamcha, yathwam_ pairikandmcha, sathram kaoyam
karafnamcha.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish **Ahurahe. Haomay6 gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah IX) (24) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide. Peresat
Zarathushtro Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda, mainyo spénishta,
datare gatthanaim astvaitinam ashaum. KO asti mainyavanam
yazatanam zaydtemd. Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdad, Verethraghnd
Ahuradhato, Spitama Zarathushtra, (25) *“Ahmai”® naom6”’ Ajasat”®
vazemn6”, Verethraghn6” Ahuradhato*', buzahe? kehrpa® renahe™,
srirahe*> tizi-sravahe*. Avatha®’ ajasat*® vohi® khvarendo*” Mazda-
dhatem*', barat* khvarend“* Mazdadhatem“, baéshazem*  ut*
amemcha”’.

(25) Unto him’ (who worships Beheram yazata and asks for his help) for the
ninth time’’ goes”** moving” in the shape*® of a beautiful** buck” fighting** with
sharp horns**. In this way (Beheram yazata created Ahura Mazda who) bears”
good” lustre” glory*, healing remedy* also** courage, comes up* (for the
help of that person).

Aat ahmdi amavastemd, ama ahmi amavastemé, verethra ahmi
verethravastemd, khvarenangha ahmi khvarenanguhastemd, yana ahmi
yanavastemd, saoka ahmi saokavastem0, baéshaza ahmi baéshazydtem0.
Aat tbaeshao taurvayeni vispanam tbaeshavatam, tbaeshao daevanam
mashyanamcha, yathwam_ pairikandmcha, sathram kaoyam
karafnamcha.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish **Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

aot For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.
aou Dr. Geldner takes para 25 (up to ¢izi-sravahe) in the verse-form of 4 lines.

aov For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.


--- Page 287 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 271

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah X) (26) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide. Peresat
Zarathushtro Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda, mainyo spénishta,
datare gatthanaim astvaitinam ashaum. KO asti mainyavanam
yazatanam zaydtemd. Aat mraot Ahurd Mazdad, Verethraghnd
Ahuradhaté Spitama Zarathushtra. (27) Ahmai®® dasem6”’ Ajasat”
vazemno” Verethraghno*” Ahuradhato*' virahe* kehrpa® raévato™
srirahe*> Mazdadhatahe*, barat*’ karetem** zarany6-saorem” frapi-
khshtem” *”visp6-paésanghem*!. Avatha®” Ajasat® vohu“* khvareno*
Mazdadhatem“ barat” khvareno** Mazdadhatem”, baéshazem* uta*!
amemcha™.

(27) Unto him” (who worships Beheram yazata and asks for his help) for
the tenth time?’ goes** moving” in the shape*? of a radiant** hero”
**nossessed*’ of a sword*® with a golden hilt*’, twisted by bending” (and) all-
adomed*!, created by Ahura Mazda. In this way” (Beheram Yazata created
by Ahura Mazda) who bears*’ good* lustre*’, glory*® healing remedy”°, also*!
courage”, comes up* (for he help of that person).

Aat ahmdi amavastemd, ama ahmi amavastemé, verethra ahmi
verethravastemd, khvarenangha ahmi khvarenanguhastemd, yana ahmi
yanavastemd, saoka ahmi saokavastem0, baéshaza ahmi baéshazydtem0.
Aat tbaeshao taurvayeni vispanam tbaeshavatam, tbaeshao daevanam
mashyanamcha, yathwam_ pairikandmcha, sathram kaoyam
karafnamcha.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish **Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XI) (28) Verethraghnem! Ahruradhatem? yazamaide’,
arsh6-karem‘, marsh6-karem‘, frash6-karem*, hvakhshtem’,
hvayaonem’, Tem’ yazata’’ yo" ashava’ Zarathushtro™,
Verethraghnahe"™ paiti manahi', Verethraghnahe’ paiti vachahi'’,
Verethraghnahe™ paiti shyaothne”, Verethraghnahe” paiti fravake?'!,

aow Dr. Geldner takes para 27 up to here in the verse form of 6 lines.

aox I have translated in this way, taking barat-keretem as a compound; but if we consider a sep-
arate sentence from the word barat, it can then be translated as (Beheram Yazata in the shape of
a hero) keeps (with himself) a sword with a golden hilt, twisted by bending and all-adorned.”

aoy For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.


--- Page 288 ---

272 KHORDEH AVESTA

Verethraghnahe” paiti paitivake’. (29) Ahmai™ dathat** Verehraghn6”*
Ahuradhato”’, erezoish* khao”, bazvao* aojo*', tanvd” vispayao™*
dravatatem™, tanvo** vispayao* vazdvare*’”, aomcha*® sikem® yim“
baraiti*! Karoé” Masyod* upapo“ Yo6* Ranghayao* diraéparayao”,
jafrayao*® hazangr6-virayao”, varesdstavanghem” 4pod*! urvaésem*”
marayeite™.

(28) We worship? Beheram! (yazata) created by Ahura Mazda’ (who is)
yielding virility’, death bringing’, one who promotes® (or who helps to
progress’), standing steadily’ (or firm-footed’) “possessing sufficient
vigour’. Him?’ *“worshipped’® Holy’ Zarathushtra'’? in thought’*, word",
deed’, admonition”', and answer’? of Beheram (yazata)”. (29) Unto him™
(i.e. unto Holy Prophet Zarathushtra) Beheram’® (yazata) created by Ahura
Mazda gave” **the fountain” of truth’’, strength*! of both the arms*°, health™
of the entire* body”, happiness*’ and that*® eye-sight*® which* the fish®
(called) *Kara” living in water** possesses*'. Explanation:- (As regards the
eye-sight of Kara Fish it is stated),

That*> (fish called kara) can see* ‘a thing of the size of the hair in the
waters”! of (the River called) *"Rangha*® whose ends lie afar*’ (and whose
depth is a thousand times the height of a man”.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish **Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XII) (30) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide, arsho-
karem, marsho-karem, frashd-karem, hvakhshtem, hvayaonem, Tem

aoz Keeping advice (and) who has a free way (Darmesteter).

apa i.e. The Prophet Zarathushtra remembered all the good thoughts, good words, good deeds
and admonitions of Beheram yazata. The Holy Zarathushtra worshipped Beheram yazata for
gaining success in thought, word, deed, in conversation and prompt answering. (Darmesteter).

apb Similar to this Ashahe Khdo (source of righteousness); see Yasna Ha X.4.

apc As regards to the explanation of Kara Fish,see my translation of Vendidad fargard XIX, 42"
para and fargard XX, 4" para.

apd “Can see a rippling of water not thicker than a hair” (Harlez and Darmesteter). The meaning
of Urvaésa is also “end, extremity”, (see yasna ha 71, para 14).

ape Rangha was the greatest river amongst the ancient Iranians. The Xaxartes river (Spiegel,
Justi and Geiger); the River Oxus (Harlez) the River Tigris (Darmesteter).

apf For its translation, see Karda 1 of this yasht.


--- Page 289 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 273

yazata yO ashava Zarahushtrd, Verethraghnahe paiti manahi,
Verethraghnahe paiti vachahi, Verethraghnahe paiti shyaothne,
Verethraghnahe paiti fravake, Verethraghnahe paiti **paitivake. (31)
Ahmai *“dathat?> Verethraghn6o*® Ahuradhato’’, erezdish?® khao”,
bazvao* aojo*', tanvd’ vispayao* dravatatem™, tanvd* vispayao*
vazdvare*’”, aomcha*® sikem® yim“ baraiti*!' asp6 arsha”; yo*
tanthrayaschit* hacha_ khshafnd* avakhshaityao* aiwi-awrayaéo”’,
aspaém*® varesem*” zemadha™ sayanem*! vaénaiti’, kataro* aghravo~
va biinavo® va*.

(31) Unto him™ (i.e. unto the Holy Prophet Zarathushtra) Beheram”®
(yazata) created by Ahura Mazda’ gave”’, the fountain” of truth’®, strength*!
of both arms*’, health** of the entire’ body**, happiness*’ of the entire*®
body*®, and that** eye sight*” which” a horse possesses".

Explanation:- (As regards the sharp eye-sight of the horse it is stated as
under.)

Who* (i.e. the horse) in the dark“ night*, **perfectly-stilled and silent*
(and) overcast with clouds*’ sees* a horse’s** hair® lying® on the ground”?
(and *"'can recognise” whether® it is the head™ or** the tail®.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XIII (32) Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide, arsho-
karem, marsho-karem, frashd-karem, hvakhshtem, hvayaonem, Tem
yazata yO ashava Zarahushtrd, Verethraghnahe paiti manahi,
Verethraghne paiti vachahi, Verethraghnahe paiti shyaothne,
Verethraghnahe paiti fravake, Verethraghnahe paiti *“paitivake. (33)
Ahmai* dathat*® Verethraghn6o** Ahuradhato”’, erezdish?® khao”,
bazvao* aojo*', tanvd’ vispayao* dravatatem™, tanvd* vispayao*

apg For its translation see Karda XI, para 28 of the yasht.

aph “Dark and without any light whatever” (Speigel and Harlez); “obscure and dark, totally
dark” (Darmesteter). It is said about the Arabian horses that they can see a hair lying on the
ground in the darkest night. See English translation of Bundehesh by Professor West.

api We find in the Pahlavi Bundahesh Chapter 19 para 31, writing similar to that given in Kar-
das XII and XIII.

apj For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.

apk For its translation see Karda XI, para 28 of this yasht.


--- Page 290 ---

274 KHORDEH AVESTA

vazdvare*’, aomcha® sukem® yim“ baraiti*’ kahrkaso” zarenumainish*.
Yo“ naomyachit* hacha danghaot* mushti-masanghem” khrim* aiwi-
vaénaiti”, avavatchit® yatha*! siikayao” brazayao~ brazem™,
avavatchit® yatha® sukayao*’ naézem**.

(33) Unto him™ (i.e. unto the Holy Prophet Zarathushtra) Beheram”®
(yazata) created by Ahura mazda*’ gave’, the fountain” of truth’’, the
strength*' of both the arms*’, health** of the entire? body”, and that*® eye
sight? which® the vulture” with a golden collar*’ possesses*'.

Explanation: (As regards the sharp eye-sight of the vulture it is stated:)

That (vulture) *"'sees* from the country** up to nine times the distance a
piece of flesh* as thick as a fist*’, the brilliance™ of a shining® needle* as
well as its*’ point”.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *"Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XIV) (34) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem? yazamaide’.
Peresat* Zarathushtré° Ahurem Mazdam‘’, Ahura Mazda’ mainyo®
Spénishta’, datare’’ gaéthanam" astvaitinam'’ ashaum'. Yat'* bavani's
aiwi-sasto'® aiwi-shmaretd'’’ pouru-naram'® tbishayantam'’, chish”
anghe”! asti?? baéshazo”3. (35) Aat*4 mraot?’ Ahurd Mazdad*, mere-
ghahe””’ peshd-parenahe*® vareiyanahe”® perenem*  ayasaésha*',
Spitama®’ Zarathushtra*. Ana™ parena® tanim’* aiwi-sifoish*’, ana*®
parena*®’ hamerethem“paiti-sanghaésha“!. (36) Yando” baraiti*? astavo“
va* takhmahe*, mereghahe“, parenavo” va*® takhmahe” maereghahe”.
Naédha*! chish” raéva*mashya™ jainti*’ naédha fraéshyeiti*®. Paurva-
he’ nemo baraiti*®, paurva® khvrenao” vidharayeiti’, upastam®
mereghahe™ parend® mereghanam®. (37) *""Tao” Ahurd® sastranam®
danghu-paitish”, noit”' satem” jainti? viraja”“, noit™ hakeret’ jainti”’
vaésaépa”™, dim” jainti® frasha aéiti*'.

(34) We praise*? Beheram (yazata') created by Ahura Mazda’. (Prophet)
Zarathushtra® asked* (the Creator): O Ahura mazda’ most beneficent® Spirit®,

apl i.e. from the highest height, about the vulture it is said that it sees a piece of flesh as thick as
a fist fallen upon the ground from the highest height. See English translation of Professor West’s
Bundeshesh, Chapter 19.

apm For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.

apn Dr. Geldner takes para 37 in the verse form of 4 lines.


--- Page 291 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 275

Creator’ of the corporeal!* world"’, (and) righteous’!

When" I am’ *injured’®, harmed and *’cast by incantation!’ amongst
many tormenting’® persons’, am under the use of spells, what”? is” the
remedy” then’! ? (i.e. how can I heal the wound?)

(35) Then™ spoke?* Ahura Mazda”®: O Spitaman* Zarathushtra**! *"*thou
shouldst seek*' the *"feathers*? of the bird’? (called) **Pesho-parena™
fluttering the wings”’. With that** feather’ thou shouldst rub*’ (thy) body*®
(and) shouldst drive away thy enemy*® by curses*!. (36) No! one can
smite® (that) fortunate’? man™ (or) can harass* (him) who” holds* bones“
of (that) strong* bird*® or** feathers*’ of (that) bird*’. (The person who keeps
it) bears” first respect®* for him*’ (because) (on account of it he) maintains”
glory’. The feather® of (that) bird®* amongst the birds® (brings) help™
“(unto the keeper.)

(37) The Lord® of the rulers” (or) the master” of the land” or the killer
of hundred” heroes” (as well) cannot’! smite” at one stroke” (rather) that
(bird) alone” can smite® all of them” and *exercise superiority®' (over
them).

(38) *’’Vispe® teresenti® perenine™, avatha®’ mavayachit* tanuye*’,
vispe® teresenti®® aurvatha’’, vispe’' teresenti?? dushmainyush’’,
amemcha™ verethraghnemcha’, nidhatemcha” tanuye” mano”. (39)
Yim” vashaonte! ahurdongh6!, vashaonte? ahuiryaonghd’, vashaonte‘
haosravanghan6*; tem® vashata’ Kava Usa®. Yim’ asp6 arsha" baraiti"',
yim” ushtro’’ vadhairish"” baraiti'’, yim’ afsh’” navaya' baraiti’’. (40)
Yim?’ Thraétaond?! takhmod” barat, yo janat?> Azim Dahakem’*,
thrizafanem’’, thri-kameredhem”, khshvash-ashim”, hazangra-
yaokhshtim”, ash-aojanghem*', daévim* drujem*, aghem™ gaéthabyo**

apo Root aiwi sangh = Sanskrit abhi-shans = to injure or to curse.

app i.e. anyone has cast spell upon me; original meaning having remembered (the spell), (root,
Sanskrit smar = to remember).

apq Take thou a feather of that bird called “Varenjana” having big wings.
apr Bird, feather or wing symbolises for fravashi or guardian angel of an individual.
aps Ordinary meaning of Peshd-parena is “Owl-feathered (bird).”

apt Based upon the translation of Prof. Darmesteter. Taking ya ndo as two words separately, the
translation of this para can be: The bones“ of the strong* bird” (called peshGparena mentioned
above) or** the feathers*’ of (that) strong” bird” give support* unto us”; (for this reason) any~
sensible® person does not*! smite or does not drive away” (that bird), (but) first he keeps” re-
spect™ for him’’, (because) the feather® of that bird“ amongst the birds” gives® (us) first
glory” (and) help®. This story resembles to some extent with he Simurgh’s feather in the Shah
Namah in the narration of Zale Sam.

apu Original meaning, “goes forwards”.

apv Dr. Geldner takes para 38 in the verse form of 6 lines and para 39 in the verse form of 7
lines; each line ends at the stop (.).


--- Page 292 ---

276 KHORDEH AVESTA

dravantem*, yam ash-aojastemam** drujem® fracha kerentat® Angro
Mainyush*', avi? yam* astvaitim“ gaétham*® mahrkai* ashahe”’
gaéthanam®.

(38) Just as® (they are afraid) *“of me***’, (in the same way) all® are
afraid® of the keeper of (that) feather*’. (On account of the possession of that
feather) (by means of) the courage™, victory®’ (which are) established*(in
him) and (by means of) the mental faculty (which is) engrafted (in his)
body” all®* opponents” and enemies are afraid of him®’.

(39) Whom” (i.e. that efficacious bird or the possessor of the feather of
that bird) the lords' ***call for assistance’, or those pertaining to the lords?
call for assistance’; (and whom) *’the members of the family of King
Haosravangh’ called the bird for assistance*; (King) Kai Kaus’ called it for
assistance’.

Explanation:- (Its significance is that these great persons also obtained
benefit by means of the efficacious feather of that bird).

Whom (i.e. the bird)’ the horse'®, the burden-bearing'* camel’? (and) the
navigable'* water'’ *’bear'? (support). (40) Whom* (i.e. that bird) the
gallant” (King) Faredun?! bore; who™ killed’> three-jawed’’, three-
skulled’*, six-eyed”’, ““of a thousand wiles*°, exceedingly-strong*', devilish”
Zohak*’, Druj** who was harmful**, unbeliever*® for (these) settlements;
whom*” as the most powerful** Druj* (i.e. Zohak) Angra Mainyu‘!
“dcreated*” on this corporeal** world* for the destruction* of
righteousness*’.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *“Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,

yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardaih XV) (41) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem? yazamaide’,

apw Original meaning “for my** body*’.”

apx Desire eagerly; root vas = Sanskrit vas = to wish (Darmesteter).
apy Its meaning can also be men of “good reason”.

apz On account of the excellence of the feather of the bird called Pesh6-parena, that bird was
kept on the journey by land or in sea-voyage. We get such a hint from this paragraph.

aqa Crafty. Its meaning can also be “possessed of strength”.
aqb This para occurs in yasna Ha IX (Havanim) para.

aqc For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.


--- Page 293 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 277

Verethraghno* avi imat nmanem* gaosuraby6® khvarend’ pairi-
verenavaiti’, yatha® hau'’ maza" mereghd saéno”, yatha’ ave'* awrao’
upapao” masitd” gairish'® nivanenti”.

(41) We worship? Beheram (yazata') created by Ahura Mazda, just as°
that!'® big! bird’? (called) Simurgh”” (with its wings) and these'* big'’ clouds"
full of water!’ *4cover’? the mountains!* (with their shadow); (in the same
way) Beheram (yazata)* surrounds® this house (i.e. ““world*) with glory’
through (his) “weapons.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish **Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XVI) (42) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem’? yazamaide’.
Peresat* Zarathushtro° Ahurem Mazdam‘*, Ahura Mazda’, mainyod*®
spénishta’, datare’ gaéthanam" astvaitinam’ ashaum™. Kva" asti's
Verethraghnahe’’ Ahuradhatahe” nama-azbaitish", kvaupastiitish”,
kva?! nistiitish”.

(42) We worship? Beheram (yazata') created by Ahura Mazda. (The
Prophet) Zarathushtra> asked® (the Creator). O Ahura Mazda’, most
beneficent’ Spirit* of the Corporeal!* world", holy Creator'®! Where’* is’> the
invocation of the name'® of Beheram (yazata)'°created by Ahura Mazda?
Where’? is!> (his) praise’? (And) where”! is! (his) *commendation””?

(43) Aat® mraot™ Ahurd Mazdad"5, yat® spadha?’ hanjasaonte’’,
Spitama” Zarathushtra”, rashtem*! rasma*’. Kataraschit** vishtaongho*
ahmya* noit®* vanyaonte*’, jataongho* ahmya”® noit* janyadonte*!.

(44) Chatanghro” perenao* vidharaydish* avi patham*® kataras-
chit yatard” pourvd* frayazaite’ amd hutashtd*' huraodhd”,
Verethraghn6o™ Ahuradhato™, ataro® verethra® hachaite*’. (45) Amem-
cha** Verethraghnemcha™ afrinami™, dva patara”, dva nipatara”, dva

aqd Or beat the mountains or touch the mountains (root ni-van).
age See my translation of Vendidad fargard 22, para 1.

aqf Gao = Sanskrit go=cow; sura = Sanskrit shula = weapon; gaosura = mace having the shape
of a cow (original meaning); javelin (Justi); flag (Harlez); “Beheram yazata covers that house
with the glory and (brings there) the increase (prosperity) of the cattle” (Darmesteter).

aqg For its translation, see Karda 1 of this yasht.

aqh i.e. Where is Beheram yazata invoked with his name and where are his praises sung?


--- Page 294 ---

278 KHORDEH AVESTA

nish-haretara®, dva* adhvaozen®, dva% vidhvaozen’, dva® fradh-
vaozen®, dva” amerezen”, dva” vimarezen”, dva” framerezen”.

(43) Ahura Mazda” then” replied™*; O Spitaman’? Zarathushtra*’!
(Beheram yazata is worshipped and his praise is sung) where?’ armies”’
meet** with one another”® with properly arrayed lines*. A warrior** (who)* is
not*® smitten*’ (and) the smiters*® (too) (who) are not“ smitten“! in this
(battle). (44) Thou *“shouldst hold” in hand (that efficacious) feather* on
the way. Whoever, out of the two (armies)***’ worships” Beheram yazata
first*®, the well-shapen*! (and) beautiful’ Ama” (i.e. yazata presiding over
courage) and Beheram (yazata)* created by Ahura Mazda follow*” him*?
with triumph® (45) I praise’ Ama*® (yazata) and Beheram (Yazata)* (who
are) the protectors’, preservers” and guardians’. (They) both™ (i.e. Ama
yazata and Beheram yazata) “‘force (the enemies) to retreat®; (then) both”
(the yazatas) drive (the enemies) for away’; they® drive (the enemies)
forward”; both (the yazatas)” wipe off (the enemies) exceedingly”; both”
(the yazatas) destroy’> (the enemies) (i.e. yazata named Ama and Beheram
destroy utterly the enemies coming from all sides).

(46) *“Zarathushtra”, aétem” mdanthrem’® ma _ fradaésaydish”,
anyat® pithre®! va” puthrai®, brathre* va* hadho-zatai*’, athravanai*’
va** thrayaone®. Aétaécha™ te?! vacho” yoi® ughra™ as, derezra” as”’
ughra® as” vyakhaine’ 4s', ughra? 4s*, verethraghne‘ 4s*, ughra® 4s’,
baéshazya® 4s’. Aétaécha’® te’ vwachod” yoi'? peshemchit’ sarem's
bunjainti’’, uzgereptemchit"’ snathem' apasha” apa-khvanvainti’”.

(46) (The Creator Ahura Mazda says):- Thou, O Zarathushtra! *"shouldst
not teach this’’ Holy Spell to (anyone) except (these three) a father®' having
sons® or® a brother™ born from the “""same womb* or® a priest*’ of *"three

aqi Chatangro - the exact meaning of this word is not settled; two, both (Harlez); four
(Darmesteter). “Do thou spread that feather on the way of both (the armies)” (Harlez); “do thou
throw four feathers on the way” (Darmesteter). In the text of Westergaard there is jatangro in-
stead of chatangro. Spiegel has left out the meaning of this word.

aqj “Drive away to the right flank, to the left flank from all directions”. (Darmesteter). Dr. Geld-
ner has taken the reading “adhv6zen, vidhvozen, fradhvozen”.

aqk The sentence from “Zarathushtra” up to “thrayaone” (except the word anyat) of para 46 also
occurs in the 9" para of Khordad yasht.

aql “Let not this Holy Spell be taught to anyone, except by the father to hisson,or by the brother
to his brother from the same womb, or by the Athravan to his pupil” (Prof. Darmesteter). This
Holy Spell should not be taught to anyone except to his father, to his son, to his own another
brother from the same womb, or to the appointed priest of his own house (i.e. unto that appoin-
ted priest getting remuneration from the house).

aqm i.e. a brother who has another brother or sister.

aqn The significance of “three religious orders” can be Herbad, Mobed, and Dastur. If the word
thrayaone be derived from the root thra (to nourish) instead of taking thrdya, meaning “three”,
then the meaning of ““athravanai thrayaone” can thus be “‘the priest nourish (the poor)”.


--- Page 295 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 279

religious orders®’.

(O Zarathushtra!) these*’ words” (i.e. the words of Holy Spell mentioned
in the above paragraph) (are) for thee”’.

Explanation:- (Its description as to what sort of these Holy Spells are is
stated as follows).

Which® (Spells) *““are efficacious” (and) courageous”; (those Spells)
are” efficacious™® for a person sitting in the assembly'”, for victory‘, are
powerful® (and) healing’. (O Zarathushtra!) those’? words” (are) for thee'’,
which’ purify'® the sinful'* *"head'> and renders the uplifted'® weapon'®
ineffective”.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *“Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XVII) (47) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem? yazamaide’. Y6*
virazaitis antare’ rashta’ rasmana® Aacha paracha peresaite? hadha
Mithra’ hadha Rashnavo", kod’ Mithrem’ aiwi-druzaiti', ko*
Rashnim” paiti-irinakhti'’, kahmai'® yaskemcha” mahrkemcha”
azem?! bakhshani” khshayamno™. (48) Aat™ mraot?5 Ahurd Mazdad*%,
yim?’ mashyaka”* frayazaonte” Verethraghno” Ahuradhato*', data-he®
yim® shyeiti** daityOtem6* yasnascha* vahmascha*’, ashat hacha yat
vahishtat*®. °“"“Noit® ithra® Airyao danghavo"' frash hyat” haéna*, noit*
voighna*, noit** pama*’, nodit*® kapastish”, noit™ haényo™ ratho”, noit™
uzgereptod™ drafsho*.

(47) We praise? Beheram (yazata)' created by Ahura Mazda’; who* goes
along to issue a command? between’ the lines of army® well-arrayed’, (and)
along with Meher’ (and) Rashne (yazata)'’ asks’ (men of that army):-

Who” deceives’* Meher (yazata)? Who’ *“offends'? Rashna yazata?

aqo Originally this verb (Gs) is in the imperfect tense. For its explanation see my Avesta Gram-
mar, Syntax, page 305.

aqp Or improves the sinful or depraved chief (see yasna Ha 11, para 3).
aqq For its translation, see Karda 1 of this yasht.

aqr From here, i.e. from “ndit ithra Airyao danghavo” up to “baévareghnai ahakhsh-
taghnaishcha” at the end of para 53 of this yasht, occurs also in paras 56-61 of Tir yasht.

aqs Original meaning; “pours out”. The significance of it is, “man who breaks his given promise
and destroys truth?”


--- Page 296 ---

280 KHORDEH AVESTA

22

Unto whom" shall I?! who am powerful” (or the ruler)*? grant” disease’? and

death’?

(48) Thereupon™ Ahura Mazda” replied”: If?’ men** worship” Beheram
(yazata)*° created by Ahura Mazda*! and if* they *“continue* to perform
properly for him® the most proper* worship* and invocation*’ with the best
righteousness, (then) here“ (i.e.) unto the Iranian Countries ““can come up”
neither® the hostile army* nor calamity* (or obstacles), neither*®
“Wdisease*’ nor** *“fraud”, neither* chariots” of the hostile army*' nor the
uplifted** banner (of the enemy).

(49) Paiti dim* peresat®’ Zarathushtrd**, kat® zi asti®!' Ahura
Mazda”, Verethraghnahe® Ahuradhatahe™ daityotemo® yasnascha”
vahmascha ashat hacha yat vahishtat®, (50) Aat® mraot” Ahurd
Mazdao", zaothrao” he” uzbarayen”™ Airyao danghavo™; baresma” he”
starenayen” Airyao danghavo”; pasim*® he*' pachayen® Airyao dang-
havo*; aurushem™ va*, vohi-gaonem® va*’ kachit® va® gaonanam”
ham6-gaonem”!.

(49) (The Prophet) Zarathushtra** asked*’ Him (i.e. the Creator Ahura
Mazda); O Ahura Mazda™! which* is®’ the most proper®* worship® and
invocation’ indeed® of Beheram (yazata)® created by (you) and (performed)
with the best righteousness°*?

(50) Thereupon” (the Creator) Ahura Mazda” replied”; (The people of)
Iranian countries” may bring” libations” for him” (i.e. for Beheram yazata),
“*may spread the Baresman” for him”, ““may cook” for him*! the cattle*® of
white colour“ or® of *”good colour® or of one and the same colour”!
whatever*® the colour”.

(51) Ma” he? mairyo™’ géurvayoit®, ma jahika®’ ma ashavo”
asravayat-gatho', ashumerekhsh', paityarend? imam? daénam* yam*
Ahuirim® Zarathushtrim’. (52) Yezishe® mairy6’ géurvayat”, jahika"
val’, ashavo!’ va'‘ asravayat-gatho’ ahumerekhsh", paityareno” imam
daénam” yam” Ahiirim?' Zarathushtrim”, para baéshaza™ hachaite*

aqt Original meaning “dwell, abide”; i.e. when the yasna worthy of Beheram yazata is per-
formed with guileless and sincere heart.

aqu The original meaning of the very Aydt is “can be”. This verb is potential mood third person
singular parasmaipada of root ah to be; Sanskrit sydt.

aqv Paman - Sanskrit paman - its original meaning is “scale, skin-disease”; “leprosy” (Harlez
and Darmesteter).

aqw Poison produced by “‘magic” (Harlez); “a poisonous herb” (Darmesteter).
aqx Let tie the bundles of baresma (Darmesteter).
aqy i.e. any consecrate the meal in honour of Beheram yazata after cooking with purity.

aqz “Of golden colour” (Harlez); vohu = Sanskrit vasu = gold, fire (Harlez), of black colour
(Darmesteter).


--- Page 297 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 281

Verethraghno*> Ahuradhato”. (53) Hamatha”’ Airyabyo danghubyo”
voighnao” jasaonti*; hamatha*' Airyabyd danghubyo” haéna*® frapat-
aonti*; hamatha*® Airyabyo danghubyo* janyadonte*’ panchasaghnai*®
sataghnaishcha”, sataghnai” hazanghraghnaishcha*!, hazangraghnai®
baévareghnaishcha*, baévareghnai* ahakhshtaghnaishcha*. (54)
“A dhat” uiti” fravashata*, Verethraghno” Ahuradhato™, ndit®! narod?
yesnyoO* vahmyod™ géush® urva® dami-dato*’, yat** nirem® vyambura®@
daéva" mashyaka*® daévayazd°, vohunim™ va tachayeinti®,
frashaékem* va® frashichanti®.

Explanation:- (The libations consecrated in the honour of Beheram
yazata should not be taken or eaten by the persons mentioned below).

(51) Let not” the sinful person™ hold in hand” that (consecrated thing)
nor” (let) the courtesan’’ (hold it in hand) or the violator of righteousness”,
one who recites the Gathas without chanting’, the destroyer of the world!
(or) the opponent’ of this’ religion* which* is of Ahura Mazda° revealed by
Zarathushtra’ (i.e. the enemy of the religion) - (all of them need) not®® (hold
in hands that consecrated thing). (52) But if the sinful person’ or’ the
courtesan" or'* the violator of righteousness'*, one who recites the Gathas
without chanting!*, the destroyer of the world’®, (or) the opponent’’ of this’®
religion’? which” is of Ahura Mazda”! revealed by Zarathushtra” holds it in
hand!°, Beheram yazata”> created by Ahura Mazda” then “*snatches away
the healing virtues”. (53) (Hence) equally’ (or ever)calamities” will come*?
upon the Iranian countries’, (people) of the Iranian countries** will be
smitten>’ from fifties*® to hundred-fold*®?, from hundred fold*® to thousand
fold*', from thousand fold®” to ten thousand fold*’, for innumerable* times.
(54) Then** Beheram (yazata)“ created by Ahura Mazda™ said“ thus*’:-

O men™! *“the soul*® of the Universe® created by wisdom” (i.e. the entire
world) is not®' worthy of worship® (and) worthy of invocation™, because*®
now” the demons®! (called ““Vyambura® and men worshipping® the
demons® cause the blood™ to flow® or® *“spread the practice of evil®”®.

(55) Yat nirem! vyambura’? daéva*, mashyaka‘ daévay4zo* avi°
atarem’ Abarenti® aétayao’ urvarayao”, ya!’ vaoche” haperesi’® nama"
aétem!5 aésmem” yd" vaoche!® nemetka” nama”.

ara Dr. Geldner takes para 54 in the verse form of 8 lines.

arb i.e. deprives of the means of prosperity and welfare of the country; para-hachaite means
“deprives of’; hachaite means “follows”.

arc For its analogy see yasna Ha 29, stanza 1.

ard “tearing off, lacerating” (Spiegel); “violent, insulting, ridiculing” derived from Sanskrit root
ambh (Harlez)

are Original meaning “spill the pouring” root shik, shich, Persian shinjidan = to pout.


--- Page 298 ---

282 KHORDEH AVESTA

(56) **Yat nirem”! vyambura” daéva”, mashyaka™ daévayazo”, fra
parshtim’” namayeinti?’, vi maidhyanem” fshanayeinti”, vispe°
handama®*! razayeinti”, jana®* ho* saidhin*® noit** janen*’, hadha** ho”
saidhin® ndit*’ hadhen® yat nirem*® vyambura“ daéva*, mashyaka**
daévayazo”, ushi* pairi-darayeinti*”, daéma™ ho"! pairi-urvaésayeiti”.

(55) Now! demons* (called) Vyambura? and men* worshipping the
demons? carry® near® the fire’ (for burning) this’ tree'® which is called”?
“Shaperesi (and) this'> fuel'® which’’ is called'* nemetka. (56) Now?! the
demons”™ called Vyambura and men™ worshipping the demons* bend’’
(their) backs, stretch” (their) waists*® (and) adjust* all*° the limbs*! (of their
body). Here*™ (those demons) who smite** “"attack*> (but) could not** *kill”
(i.e. they could not succeed in their wicked motives). Now* the demons*
(called) Vyambura“ and demon worshipping*’ men*® cover the intellects* (of
others) and “also their eye-sight™.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish ““Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XVIII) (57) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem? yazamaide’.
Haomem‘ baire’ sairi-baoghem®, Haomem’ verethrajanem® baire’,
nipatarem” vohi" baire” patarem! tanuye’ baire'®; Haomem!' yim
nivazaiti'’ nivandat'® apayeiti’? dushmainyaot” 4 peshana”!' hacha”. (58)
Yatha* azem™* aom? spadhem” vanani’’, yatha’® azem” aom*’
spadhem*! nivanani”, yatha® azem* aom* spadhem” nijanani*’, yo** me
paskat® vazaiti”.

(57) We praise? Beheram (Yazata)' created by Ahura Mazda’. I keep with

arf Dr. Geldner takes para 56 in the verse-form of 11 lines.

arg Haperesi and nemetka should be some kind of green and bad wood unfit for bringing into
use for burning on the fire. The meaning of the word nemetka is seen from its root nam (Persian
nam = wet). According to Zoroastrian religion the fuel for burning should be quite dry and well-
examined in the light (see Atash Nyayesh).

arh Root sad = Sanskrit shad = to attack.
ari Root hadh = Sanskrit sadh = to kill.

arj This entire paragraph is complicated; I myself am not sure of this translation, more accurate
translation than this should be done. Professor Darmesteter translates the last sentence as fol-
lows:- “The intellect of Vyambura demons is weakened and the eye sight is spoiled.”

ark For its translation, see Karda 1 of this yasht.


--- Page 299 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 283

me* Haoma‘* (which is ) purifying impurity; I keep with me? Haoma’ (which
is) victorious®; I keep with me!? Haoma'® (which is) the protector of “good
(thing)! and I keep with me’> (Haoma which is) the protector! of the body";
whosoever drinks!’ Haoma’® (by consecration) will secure escape'* from the
enemy °°”! in the battle”! (and) “"will gain success over him’? (58) so that**”4
I may smite”’ this* army”® (of the enemy), so that”® I°? may throw down”
this*® army*! (of the enemy) by smiting*’,] may subjugate’ the (army) which
comes“ behind me*’.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *"Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XIX) (59) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem? yazamaide’.
Asanem* sighiire> chithrem®’ abare’ Ahurd® puthrd’ puthraonghd”
baévare-patay6" amava’ 4s” verethrava’ nama, verethrava'® 4s!’
amava!® nama’. (60) Yatha”’ azem”! avata” verethra** hachane™ yatha*®
vispe”* anye”’ aire”. Yatha” azem* aom*! spadhem® vanani*’, yatha**
azem*> aom** spadhem*’ nivanani**, yatha® azem* aom*! spadhem®
nijanani*’, yo“ me paskat* vazaiti**.

(60) *°So that?°1?! may move about™ with such” victory” as” all’® other?’
Iranians** (do), so that” P°° may smite* and throw down* this** army*” (of the
enemy), so that*? I*° may subjugate® this*! army” (of the enemy) which“
comes” behind me*.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish *’Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

arl Meaning “vohu” is also a good thing, happiness, goodness.

arm “Whoso protects the Haoma from the blow (or trouble) saves himself from the enemy in
that battle” (Professor Harlez). Supposedly the portion from “haomem yim niv azaiti” up to “a
peshana hacha” appears to be parenthetical, i.e. a commentary.

arn For its translation, see Karda 1 of this yasht.

aro I do not understand the translation of the entire paragraph 59 from “asanem sighuire” to
“amava nama.”

arp For its translation, see Karda 1 of this yasht.


--- Page 300 ---

284 KHORDEH AVESTA

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XX) (61) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem? yazamaide’. Yatha
Ahi Vairyod 1; gave+ amem*, gave’ nemem’, gave® ukhdhem’, gave"’
verethrem", gave” khvarethem', gave'* vastrem', gave'® verezyatam”
tam ne” khvarethai” fshuy6”!.

(61) We praise? Beheram (yazata)' created by Ahura Mazda. (May there
be) courage* for the cattle*! praise’ for the cattle®! (good) words’ for the
cattle®! (May there be) victory! for the cattle’! fodder’? for the cattle'*! (May
there be) clothing’ for the cattle'*! (Men) should not be hard" to the cattle'®
(because) they are ““prosperity-bringing our’? food””.

Explanation: Its significance is, men should protect the cattle, should
give them sufficient food, take care of them at the time of extreme cold and
extreme heat, and they should not be made to work with cruelty; because
they are very useful for our happiness and benefit. The ox serves us in the
work of tilling the fields and in carrying heavy burden; the cow gives milk
from which several things are prepared for our food. It is written in yasna Ha
XI that the cattle curse the master who does not take care of his cattle and
does not give them sufficient food.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish “"Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XXI) (62) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem? yazamaide’. Y6*
rasmano° schindayeiti®, yo’ rasmand® kerentayeiti’, yo!’ rasmano"
khvanghayeiti”, yo" rasman6d"™ yaozayeiti®. Avi rasmano'® schinda-
yeiti!’, avi rasman6'* kerentayeiti’’, avi rasman6d” khvanghayeiti?', avi
rasmanod” yaozayeiti*, Verethraghno™* Ahuradhato* daévanam”
mashyanamcha’’, yathwam” pairikanamcha” sathram*® kaoyam*!
karafnamcha™.

(62) We praise* Beheram (yazata)' created by Ahura Mazda, who‘ i.e.

Beheram (yazata) ““breaks as under® the columns* (of the army of the
enemy), cuts to pieces’ the columns* wounds” the columns'' causes to

arq For comparison see yasna Ha X.20 and yasna Ha 48, 5" stanza.
arr For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.

ars Makes (the columns) “unsteady or shaky” (Professor Darmesteter).


--- Page 301 ---

BEHERAM YASHT 285

mingle'® the columns’* (of the army of the enemy) (and that) Beheram
(yazata)* created by Ahura mazda®* breaks asunder’’ the columns'® (of the
army) of the daevas”® and (wicked) mortals”’, of wizards”® and witches”, of
the tyrants*®, of the *“*kiks and karaps, cuts to pieces’? (those) columns'’,

23 aru

wounds”! and causes them to mingle”’.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish ““Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Kardah XXII) (63) Verethraghnem! Ahuradhatem? yazamaide’. Aat
yat* Verethraghno> Ahuradhato’, thakhtanam rasmanam® yukhtanam?
shoithranam” mithrd-drujam"™ mashyanam”, apash’ gavod' darez-
yeiti'’, pairi!’ daéma’” varayeiti'’, apa’? gaosha” gaoshayeiti”', nodit”
padha” vidharayeiti™, ndit*> paiti-tavao” bavaiti?’.

Ahe raya khvarenanghacha, tem yazai surunvata yasna, vereth-
raghnem Ahuradhatem; zaothrabyO verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide, yaish dataish paoiryaish ““Ahurahe. Haomayd gava bares-
mana, hizvd danghangha, manthracha vachacha shyaothnacha, zaothra-
byascha arshukhdhaéibyascha vaghzibyo.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(63) We praise? Beheram (yazata)' created by Ahura Mazda’. When‘
Beheram (yazata)° created by Ahura Mazda® binds’* behind’ the hands of the
promise-breaking'’ persons’? of the columns® of the serried’ and yoked?
(army) of the cities'®, covers!® (their) eyes’ all around’® (i.e. makes them
blind), keeps their ears”’ afar from hearing'®”° (i.e. renders them deaf) and
does not” lend support to (their) feet, and they become”’ (quite)
powerless”>*®,

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-

art kiks and karaps: See glossary.

aru Professor Darmesteter translates the sentence “‘avi rasman6 schindayeiti” etc., thus: “breaks
the columns asunder, cuts the columns to pieces, wounds the columns”, etc.

arv For its translation, see Karda 1 of this yasht.

arw For its translation, see Karda | of this yasht.


--- Page 302 ---

286 KHORDEH AVESTA

yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud) Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 2.

Yasnemhca vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinami, Vereth-
raghnahe Ahuradhatahe vanaintyaoscha uparatatd. Ashem Vohii 1.

Ahmai raéshcha; Hazangrem, Jasa me avanghe mazda; Kerfeh
Mozda.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush; Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje khoreh awazayad Beheram yazad pirozgar dushman-zadar
amahe hutashtahe, berasad amavand pirozgar amavandih pirozgari.
Dad din beh MAazdayasnan, agahi ravai goafarangani bad hafte keshvar
zamin; aedin bad. Man 4no avayad shudan, man 4no Aavayad shudan,
man 4no Avayad shudan. Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite facing the south) dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarathushti. Namse-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sura Anahite ashaone.
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem6 urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone. Ashem Vohi 1.
Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 1.

Beheram Yazad pirozgar dushman-zadar, Amahe _ hutashtahe
berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

HOM YASHT LARGE
**Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdan Ahura Mazda khodae awazini gorje khoreh
awazayad; Hom yazad berasad.””

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. As an gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tant
ravani geti mindani, okhe avakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, tarodidte angrahe mainyeush;
Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashdtemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem
Vohii 3.

arx Hom yasht vadi (Large) consists of yasna Has 9 and 10. For full explanations and notes of
the translations of both these Has, see my translation of Yasna. Even in yasna Ha 11th there oc-
curs some description about Hom Yasht. Moreover, Dr. Geldner considers these three Has as po-
etical compositions.

ary i.e. may Hom yazata come (to my help)!


--- Page 303 ---

HOM YASHT LARGE 287

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévé Ahura-tkaésh6o (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Haomahe
*"ashavazanghod, khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha
frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi vairyd zaota fra-me mrite, atha ratush
ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti. *““Haomem zairim
berezantem yazamaide; Haomem frashmim fradat-gaéthem yazamaide;
Haomem diraoshem yazamaide.

(Kardah IT (1) Havanim' 4? ratim’® 4‘, Haomd*  upait®
Zarathushtrem’ atarem® pairi-yaozdathentem’, gathaoscha”
sravayantem!; adim’” peresat’ Zarathushtrdo", ko nare’® ahi!’, yim"™®
azem'? vispahe” anghéush”' astvat6” sraéshtem” dadaresa™* khvahe*

ayehe** khvanvatd?’ ameshahe”®. (2) Aat?? me’ aém*! paiti-aokhta?

y
Haomd* ashava* diraoshd*, azem* ahmi*’ Zarathushtra** Haom6”’
ashava” duraosho"!, amam” yasanguha* Spitama“, framam‘*
hunvanguha“ khvaretée’; avi mam“ staomaine® stiidhi*’, yatha®! ma”
aparachit* Saoshyanto™ stavan*.

(1) During? the Havan' Gah? Hom* (yazata) came to* (the Prophet)
Zarathushtra’ (who was) purifying? “°the fire’ and (was) chanting!’ the
Gathas’’. (The Prophet) Zarathushtra’* asked! him'?: O man!!° Who’ art
thou!’?

Whom!* do I’? see™, the most excellent® (and) beautiful?’ and of
immortal”® life’® in the entire? corporeal”? world?!. (2) Thereupon” that*!
Hom*, the righteous**, warding off sickness* replied* unto me**: O
Zarathushtra**! °° am?’ Hom*’, the righteous”, warding off sickness*!. Seek*?
me” (i.e. desire earnestly for me) and, O Spitaman* (Zarathushtra)!
*Pound** me* out for drinking*’ and do thou praise*’ me“ in a hymn of
praise” as*! other® *““benefactors™ (of the world) have praised* me”.

(3) Aat® aokhta’’ Zarathushtrd®*, nemo” Haomai™. Kase%!-thwam
paoiryo6® Haoma“ mashyod® astvaithyai® hunita” gaéthayai®; ka®

arz i.e. for the worship etc., of Hom yazata, giving strength of righteousness (see Khorshed
Nyayesh). Spiegel, Darmesteter and Justi translate this word ashavazangho by the “holy origin,
born pure” deriving it from ashavan and zangha =root zan. Harlez gives three different mean-
ings of this word (1) of holy knowledge; (2) bom holy; (3) originator - bringer of righteousness.
But I have thought it proper to translate this word by “giving strength of righteousness”, deriv -
ing it from asha = righteousness and vazangh = strength.

asa For its translation, see para 21 of this yasht.
asb i.e. was purifying the throne of the fire vase.
asc 1.e. take out the juice for drinking by pounding then Hom twigs.

asd The meaning of “Saoshyanto” is giving light to the world, indicators of the path of morality,
piety and divine worship to the people, persons well-versed in the precepts of religion, the re-
storer of the religion in its original pure state by wiping off impurities. In the singular case its
meaning is the prophet who will be born of the mother Eredat-fedhri at the time of Resurrection-
Ristakhiz.


--- Page 304 ---

288 KHORDEH AVESTA

ahmai” ashish”! erenavi” chit”? ahmai” jasat”> ayaptem”. (4) Aat” me”
aém” paiti-aokhta® Haom6*' ashava” diraosho*, Vivanghao* mam*
paoiryo*® mashyo*’ astvaithyai*® hunita® gaéthayai”®; ha°' ahmai”
ashish® erenavi™, tat** ahmai® jasat”’ a4yaptem”; yat” he’ puthro! us-
zayata’, yo? yimo* khshaéto* hvathw0‘, khvarenanguhastem0’ zatanam’,
hvare-dareso? mashyanim’ yat"' kerenaot’” anghe'? khshathradha™
amareshinta!> pasu vira’®, anghaoshemne!’ 4pa urvaire!®; khvairyan”
khvarethem”’ ajyamnem?!. (5) Yimahe” khshathre*® aurvahe™, noit*®
aotem” dongha’’, nodit?® garemem” noit* zaurva*' aongha™”, nodit®
merethyush™, noit* arask6** daévo-dato*’. Pancha-dasa* frachardithe”
pita® puthrascha*' raodhaéshva®’ kataraschit®, yavata* khshayoit*
hvathw6* yimo” Vivanguhatd* puthro”.

(3) Then*® said*’ Zarathushtra**: Salvation (be) unto Hom®! Which*!
man®, O Hom™! (was) the first® (who) pressed out®’ thee in the corporeal®
world® (for dedication in the ceremonial rite)? What” blessing” unto him”
was granted” ? What” profit”® unto him” accrued’? (4) Thereupon”? Hom",
the righteous’, warding off sickness® replied® unto me’: Vivanghan™ (was)
the first* man*’ (who) pressed me® in (this) corporeal** world” (for
dedication in the ceremonial rite): this’ blessing” unto him*® was granted™,
this” profit unto him®’ accrued”: that” for him'® a son' **was born with
greatness’, who* was Jamshed* the King’, the most glorious’ amongst those
born’, *“beholding the sun? amongst men’ (and) good protector of the
subjects®. Who"! in this (world)? on account of (his) sovereignty’ made”?
cattle and men'® immortal'*, made” waters and vegetation'’ not drying up",
(i.e. ever fresh); (people) “*were eating’ fresh?! food””.

(5) During the rule? of the illustrious Jamshed” there was!’ neither’
(excessive) cold’® nor’ heat’, neither*® was there old age*’ nor death™,
nor*> was there” envy** following the doctrines of the daevas*’. As long as“
Jamshed*’, the son” of Vivanghan*’, the good protector of the subjects*®
reigned*, (so long) both® the father“? and the son*’ moved about*’ fifteen
“ vears of age in appearance”.

(6) Kase*’-thwam*! bityo* Haoma® mashyo™ astvaithyai*> hunita%
gaéthayai”’; ka** ahmai*® ashish® erenavi®', chit? ahmai® jasat™
ayaptem®. (7) Aat® me” aém® paiti-aokhta® Haomd” ashava’!
diraoshd”, Athwyd? mam” bityd’> mashyo” astvaithyai” hunita’®

ase i.e. in his house a son was born.

asf Or having the appearance of the Sun, sun-like in appearance, i.e. most resplendent. Sanskrit,
svardrash,

asg Men could eat imperishable food (Dr. Mills); Jamshed made food inexhaustible (Professor
Darmesteter); people were eating inexhaustible food (Professor Harlez).

ash Amongst the ancient Iranians the age of fifteen was considered to be the age of the blossom-
ing of youth and the age of maturity; see Tir yasht, paras 13-14; Beheram yasht, para 17.


--- Page 305 ---

HOM YASHT LARGE 289

gaéthayai”; ha®’ ahmai*' ashish® erenavi*, tat* ahmai*®* jasat**
ayaptem*’; yat*®* he® puthr6o” us zayata®! viso” sirayao” Thraétaono™.
(8) “YO janat® azim dahikem” thri-zafanem®, thri-kameredhem”,
khshvash-ashim™, hazangra-yaokhshtim', ash-aojanghem’, daévim*
drujem‘, aghem’ gaéthavy0° drvantem’; yam’ ash-aojastemam? drujem””
fracha kerentat" angrd mainyush” avi yam" astvaitim'’ gaétham",
mahrkai”’ ashahe'® gaéthnam”.

(6) O Hom*! Which*’ was™ the second man who pressed® out thee?! in
the corporeal*> world*’ (for dedication in the ceremonial rite)? What*®
blessing® unto him® was granted®!? What® profit® unto him® accrued? (7)
Thereupon® Hom”, the righteous” warding off sickness” replied® unto
me’: Athawyan” (was) the second”? man” (who) pressed me” out” in (this)
corporeal world (for dedication in the ceremonial rite); this*® blessing® unto
him*! was granted*, this™ profit®’ unto him® accrued*: that®* for him® (i.e. in
his house) a son®’ (named) Faredun™ of the valiant®? race” was born with
greatness”!. (8) Who” (i.e. Faredun) slew” three-jawed”’, three-skulled”, six-
orbed'”, of a thousand wiles', excessively strong’, devilish® druj* Zohak’’,
(and) who was harmful°, infidel’ for settlements®; whom® Angra-mainyu’”
created’! by far the strongest? druj'° upon’? (this) corporeal’ world'® for the
destruction'’ of the settlements'® of righteousness’®.

(9) Kase”’-thwam”! thrity6”? Haoma”® mashyo” astvaithyai*> huniita”®
gaéthayai’’, ka’*> ahmai” ashish*’ erenavi*', chit ahmai** jasat*
ayaptem*.(10) Aat®® me’? aém** paiti-aokhta® Haomd* ashava*!
diraosh6”, Thrito® Samanam“ sévisht6* thrityo“ mam” mashyd*
astvaithyai® hunita® gaéthayai*'; ha ahmai* ashish™ erenavi>, tat*
ahmiai*’ jasat® ayaptem”; yat® he! puthra® us-zaybithe® Urvakhshayo*
keresaspascha®. Tkaésho® anyod” datd-razo%, aat® anyd” upard-
kairyO”, yava” gaésush” gadhavaro™. (11) Y6" janat”® azim”
sravarem’, yim” asp6-garem® nare-garem*', yim® vishavantem*®
zairitem™; yim® upairi® vish®’ raodhat® areshtyo” bareza™ zairitem”.
yim” upairi®? Keresaspo™ ayangha” pitim” pachata”’. A rapithwinem”®
zrvanem”, tafsatcha’ ho! mairy6d? khvisatcha’; frash* ayanghd*
frasparat® yeshyantim’ Apem*® paraonghat’, parash'’ tarshtd" apa-
tachat” nare-mando™ Keresasp6".

(9) O Hom”! Which” was the third” man™ who pressed thee” out” in the
corporeal”> world’ (for dedication in the ceremonial rite)? What”* blessing*®
unto him? was granted*!? What» profit unto him* accrued* ? (10)
Thereupon*® Hom*, the righteous*!, warding off sickness” replied® unto
me*’: *!Thrita the most beneficent*® of the Sama family“ (was) the third’

asi The portion from “yo janat” up to “ashahe gaéthanam”’ at the end of this para occurs also in
Beheram yasht, para 40 and Gosh yasht, para 14 respectively.

asj “Thrita” is called in Pahlavi “Sarita” and in Persian “Asrat”.


--- Page 306 ---

290 KHORDEH AVESTA

°° 1”

man*’ (who) pressed me*’ out® in (this) corporeal® world*! (for dedication in
the ceremonial rite); this blessing** unto him® was granted**, this® profit®
unto him*’ accrued™*: that® for him®' (i.e. in his house) two sons?
Urvakhshaya™ and Keresaspa® were born with greatness’. (Of them) one”
(i.e. Urvakhshaya) was the *““religious-minded®, one who points out the path
of justice, whilst® the other” (i.e. Keresaspa) was a supremely energetic”
youth” (i.e. of youthful vigour), curly-haired” (and) a mace-bearer™. (11)
Who” (i.e. Keresaspa) killed” the serpent” *'Saravara, who” (the serpent)
(was) horse-devouring**, man-devouring®' (and) upon*® whose*® (body) the
green’' poison*’ rose® to the depth” of a thumb®’. Upon® whom” Keresaspa
cooked” the food® in an iron pot® at the time” of noon’. That! serpent? grew
hot'” and began to hiss*, and forth from the iron pot® sprang away® *"that he
might run away towards® the flowing water’. “"The brave’? Keresaspa',
being frightened", *°fled away’* from behind’”.

(12) Kase’-thwam” tiiiryo!? Haoma!* mashyd” astvaithyai?® hunita”!
gaéthayai”; ka* ahmai™* ashish* erenavi’, chit?” ahmai’® jasat”
ayaptem*. (13) Aat3! me? aém* paiti-aokhta** Haomd* ashava*
diraosho*’, Pourushaspo* mam” tiiryo*’ mashyo*' astvaithyai”
hunita® gaéthayai*; ha* ahmai* ashish” erenavi*, tat” ahmai* jasat*!
ayaptem™ yat®* he™ tim®™ us-zayangha™ tiim*’ erezvo*’ Zarathushtra”,
nmanahe” Pourushaspahe™ vidaévd" Ahura-tkaésho®. (14) Sritd™
Airyene Vaéjahi® tim® paoiryo®” Zarathushtra® Ahunem Vairim®
frasravayo”, viberethvantem” akhtiirim’” aparem” khraozdyehya”™
frasriiti®. (15) Tim” zemar-giizo” Akerenavo” vispe” daéva*
Zarathushtra*!, yoi® para ahmat® viro-raodha™ apatayen®, paiti®® aya*’
zema**; yo*” aojishto”, yo! tanjishto”, yo” thwakhshishto™, yo
asishto”, yo” ash-verethrajastem6” abavat” mainivao'’™” daman'.

(12) O Hom"*! Which"’ man’ (was) the fourth’? man (who) pressed thee’®
out”! in the corporeal” world” (for dedication in the ceremonial rite)? What”
blessing? unto him** was granted”°? What’’ profit*® unto him** accrued” ?
(13) Thereupon*! Hom**, the righteous**, warding off sickness*’ replied** unto
me: Pourushaspa** (was) the fourth*® man‘! (who) pressed me* out® in
(this) corporeal*? world“ (for dedication in the ceremonial rite). This*

blessing*’ unto him** was granted*’, this” profit unto him* accrued*! that®

ask Or “the one who points out the path of the religion (i.e. Dastoor) and organiser of laws (i.e.
framer of good laws); an upright judge” (Mills).

asl Horned (Darmesteter and Mills); derived from srava = horn.

asm Having come out upset the boiling water (Mills).

asn The original meaning of nare-mando is of manly heart-mind; Nariman (the later meaning);
according to Shah Nameh, he is the father of the hero Sam.

aso Although Keresaspa at first started by the giant-like serpent, but eventually he killed him.
About the heroism of the hero Keresaspa, his adventurous deeds and acts of bravery, see
Zamyad yasht, paras 41-44.


--- Page 307 ---

HOM YASHT LARGE 291

for him™ (i.e. in his house) thou wast born with greatness*. O righteous™
Zarathushtra™! thou*’ art of the house” of Pourushaspa‘', estranged (from the
doctrines of) the daevas”, (and) follower of the Law of Ahura Mazda®.

(14) O Zarathushtra™! famed” in Airyana Vaejah® thou® (was) the first®’
(who) recited aloud” the *"Ahuna Vairya®, spread” abroad” chanted *“four
times” (and) then” he chanted” with a louder” voice. (15) Thou”, O
Zarathushtra*!! who among the creatures! of the two spirits! was
“created” the strongest”, who”! (was created) the most firm”, most active”,
the swiftest®® and who’ (was) exceedingly victorious” (or excessive smiter
of the enemy) ““caused” all” the demons® to hide under the earth” who® up
to now® ran about*® upon® this*’ earth** in human shape™.

(16) Aat? aokhta? Zarathushtr6‘, nem6d*> Haomai®, Vanghush’ Haomd®
hudhatd’; Haomd'® arshdatd", vanghush” datd°, baéshazyo",
hukerefsh'’, hvaresh’® verethrajao”’, zairi-gaon6, namyasush. Yatha”’
khvarente”! vahisht6”, urunaécha™® pathmainydtem6*. (17) Ni’> te”
zaire”’ madhem”® mriye”, ni amem*, ni verethraghnem*'; ni dasvare”,
ni baéshazem®, ni fradathem™, ni varedathem*, ni aojo** vispotanum””’,
ni mastim*® visp6-paésanghem™”; ni tat*? yatha*! gaethahva” vaso-
khshathro* fracharane“, thaésh6-taurvao* drujemvano*. (18) Ni tat*’,
yatha®* taurvayeni® vispanam*® tbaéshavatam*' tbaéshao”, daévanam*
mashyanamcha™, yathwam*® pairikanamcha™, sathram*’ kaoyam*
karafnamcha®, mairyanamcha™ bizangranam”, ashemaoghanamcha™
bizangranam®, vehrkanamcha®™ chathwarezangranam®, haénayaoscha®
perethu-ainikayao”, davaithyao® pataithyao”.

(16) Thereupon (the Prophet) Zarathushtra* said’: Salutations’ (be) upon
Hom®! Hom is excellent’ (and) well-created?: Hom!® (is) truth-created",
health-giving'*, well-shaped!*, working for good’®, victorious!’ (or smiter of
the enemy'’), golden-hued'* (or of green colour)'’, with bending twigs'’. Just
as” (he is) best** for the drinker’', so also (he is) leading most to heavenly
path” for the soul*’. (17) O green-hued?’ (Hom)! I *‘request*>” (ask a favour
of) (all) these*® - thy”® wisdom’, courage*, victory’, health, means of
gaining health*’, prosperity*’, increase**, strength*® of the entire body*’ (and)

asp About the explanation and excellence of Ahunavar, see Ahunavar translation and explana-
tion, and also Srosh Yasht Hadokht paras. 3-6.

asq The meaning of akhtiirim can be, that which is to be chanted four times, based upon
Vendidad fargard X, para 12, where Ahunavar is included among the class of hymns to be re-
cited four times, and upon yasna HS XXVII during the pounding of Haoma when Ahunavar is
recited four times. “Reciting four times with musical tone”. (Mills)

asr In original form this verb (abavat) is in third person.

ass i.e. Thou didst open the way for the prosperity of the world by destroyi ng the demons and
their evil, see Fravardin yasht, paras 87-95.

ast Or alternatively: O green-hued (HOM)! I ask of thee wisdom, courage, victory, health,
prosperity, etc. It is understood that after every ni, adverb mruye is required.


--- Page 308 ---

292 KHORDEH AVESTA

greatness** possessing all kinds of *"brilliance*’, so that*! I may move about“
(or I may rule“) like an independent Sovereign*’, destroyer of malice* (and)
vanquisher of the druj**, in (all) lands®. (18) (I ask for all) these*’ (ie.
wisdom, courage, victory, health, greatness, etc.) so that*® I may overcome”
malice” - of all®® enemies*!, demons, mortals, wizards*, witches”,
tyrants*’, the Kiks*’, and *’Karaps”, ““of men®! *“having the nature of
serpents®, heretical” persons, four-legged® wolves“, (and) of the army”

with an extensive battle-array®’, deceiving™ (and) rushing onwards”.

(19) Imem” thwam” paoirim” yanem™ Haoma™ jaidhyemi’
diraosha”, vahishtem ahiim” ashaonam”™ raochanghem” vispo-
khvathrem®. Imem*®! thwam® bitim® yanem** Haoma® jaidhyemi*
diraosha®’, drvatatem® anghaose® tanvo”. Imem*! thwam” thritim™
yanem™ Haoma” jaidhyemi® diraosha’’, daregh6-jitim”® ushtanahe”.
(20) Imem'® thwam! tiirim? yanem? Haoma‘ jaidhyemi> diraosha’,
yatha aésh0’ amavao® thrafedhd’, frakhshtane!’ zema" paiti?, tbaéshd-
taurvao’ drujem-vano". Imem' thwam" pukhdehm” yanem'® Haoma”
jaidhyemi”’ diraosha?', yatha” verethrajaéo™ vanat-pishano™, frakhsh-
tane*> zema” paiti?’? tbaéshd-taurvao* drujem-van6d”. (21) Imem*°
thwam*! khshttim” yanem® Haoma™ jaidhyemi* diraosha*, paurva*’
tayim*® paurva® gadhem“® paurva“' vehrkem” biidhydimaide*; ma
chish* pourvé* biidhyaéta* nd”, vispe* paurva” biidhyadimaide”.

(19) O Hom”, warding off sickness”! this” (is) the first” gift” (that) I
request’? of thee”: heaven” of the righteous (people) bright” (and) all
comfortable®. O Hom*®, warding off sickness*’! this*' (is) the second® gift™
(that) I request®® of thee**: health** of this® body”. O Hom®, warding off
sickness*’! this’! (is) the third® gift? (that) I request’® of thee” long
existence” of life**. (20) O Hom* warding off sickness®*’! this'® (is) the
fourth’ gift? (that) I request® of thee’! I may move about'® (or I may rule’)
on” (this) earth"! as *Yhaving fulfilled my desires’, courageous’, satisfied’,
the destroyer of malice’? (and) the sraiter of falsehood'*. O Hom", warding
off sickness”'! this'® (is) the fifth’? gift'® (that) I request’? of thee'®:1 may
move about” (or I may rule”*) on’’ (this) earth*® as victorious’, (or smiting
the enemy”), conqueror in the battle™, the destroyer of malice** (and) the
smiter of falsehood”. (21) O Hom*, warding off sickness**! this*® (is) the
sixth” gift*? (that) I request** of thee*': may we become aware* beforehand*’

asu “Understanding of each adorning kind” (Mills); “Knowledge of all types” (Darmesteter).
asv For its explanation, see Hormazd yasht, para 10 notes.
asw Murderers (Mills); thieves, robbers (Darmesteter); sinner (Harlez).

asx The Original meaning of bizangra is biped. Perhaps its significance may be biped animal
(man).

asy Yatha aésho = Sanskrit yathd-ishtam = according to one’s own wish; root ish = Sanskrit ish
= to wish.


--- Page 309 ---

HOM YASHT LARGE 293

of the thief**, the murderer*’ (and) of the wolf. Let not any“ (other) become
aware“ beforehand* of us*’; may we become aware” beforehand” of all".

(22) Haom6*! aéibish®, yoi? urvanto™ hita® takhshenti®* erenaum*’
zavare® aojaoscha® bakhshaiti®. Haom6 Azizanaitibish? dadhaiti®
khshaéto-puthrim™, uta® ashava-frazaintim®. Haomd6” taéchit®, yoi®
katayO” nasko-frasaongh6d” donghenti”?, spand” mastimcha™ bakh-
shaiti’>. (23) Haom6” taoschit’’, yao” kainind” donghare*®’ dareghem*!
aghrav6o”, haithim® radhemcha* bakhshaiti*® mdshu® jaidhyamno*’
hukhratush®. (24) Haom6” temchit® yim®! keresanim®”  apa-
khshathrem*® nishadhayai™“, yo raosta’ khshathro-kamaya’’. Yo”
davata”® ndit'” me! apam? athrava® aiwishtisht veredhye*> danghava‘
charat’, ho® vispe’ varedhanam’ vanat"', ni’? vispe’> varedhanam"™
janat’s.

(22) Hom” grants® strength** and power unto those who* cause the
steeds™ restrained with reins run*® in the race-course’’. Hom®' *“bestows®™
on ““women who are bearing® brilliant sons“ (and) also® righteous
progeny®. Hom® granteth” wisdom” and greatness” unto those® house-
holders” who® sit” “°studying the scriptures’. (23) Hom” of good
wisdom®, being entreated*’ doth grant® quickly® the true* (or honest**)
husband*™ unto those” who” have remained® virgins” for a long time®’.

(24) Hom® dethroned™ him” who”! (was) “*Keresani” by removing from
sovereignty”, who” was swelled’ up in (his) ambition for sovereign
power’’. Who” (Keresani) (during the period of his sovereignty) bragged”
(with pride): Never’ henceforth? in my! land® shall any priest*, teacher*
move about’ for propagating’ (Zoroastrian Religion), (because) he® will
destroy'! the whole’ of (my) increase'®, and will ruin'*'> the whole’? of (my)
prosperity”*.

(25) Ushta'’® te!’, yo'® khva!? aojangha” vasdkhshathro”! ahi”
Haoma”. Ushta™ te, apivatahe® pouru-vacham”’ erezikhdhanam”.
Ushta” te*, noit*! pairi-frasa* erezikhdhem® peresahi* vachem”. (26)
Fra te** = Mazdao*” barat® paurvanim’, aiwydaonghanem“
stehrapaésanghém*! mainyutashtem”’, vanguhim* daénam* Mazda-
yasnim‘*s, Aat* anghe*’ ahi*® aiwyast0” bareshnush” paiti®' gairinam™,
drajanghe® aiwidhaitishcha” gravascha® manthrahe*. (27) Haoma*’
nmano-paiti® vispaiti®, zantu-paiti® danghu-paiti®', spanangha®
vaédhya-paiti®, amaicha“ thwa® verethraghnaicha®, mavoya” upa-

asz For its opposite see yasna Ha X, para 15.
ata Or women desiring to beget children; root zan = Sanskrit jan.

atb Nuska, i.e. books written in holy Avesta scriptures. Its total number was 21. For its explana-
tion, see “Names of the 21 Nasks” above.

atc According to Professor Darmesteter, he could be compared to Alexander (Sikandar).


--- Page 310 ---

294 KHORDEH AVESTA

mruye® tanuye” thrimaicha” yat” pouru-baokhshnahe”. (28) Vi73-no”
tbaéshavatam”™ tbaéshebish” vi’ mano” bara” garamantam®. Yo*!
chishcha® ahmi® nmane,™ yd* anghe* visi*’, yo* ahmi® zantvo™, yo”!
anghe” danghvo” aénanghao™ asti®> mashy6” géurvaya”’ he” padhave”
zavare™ pairi'-she’ ushi? verentidhi*, skendem* she® man0’ kereniidhi®.
(29) Ma’ zbarethaéibya” fratuyao", ma” gavaéibya™ aiwi-tituyao",
ma zim! vaéndit!’ ashibya’®, ma” gam’ vaéndit?! ashibya”, yo”
atnanghaiti* nd*5 mand” yo?’ aénanghaiti?® nd” kehrpem”.

(25) O Hom”! Greatness'® (or hail'®) (be) unto thee!’! (Thou) who’? art”
ruling at will*’ by thine own’? power”. (O Hom!) greatness™ (be) unto thee”*!
Thou dost understand” truthfully spoken”* full words’. (O Hom!) greatness”
(be) unto thee*’! Thou *“dost not?! question™ the word* truly uttered® by
cross (or round-about) questioning. (26) (O Hom!) (the Creator) Ahura
Mazda*’ brought** for thee*® the sacred-girdle star-adorned*! (and)
fashioned by the Spirits (and) the good* Mazda-worshipping® religion“.
Invested with the girdle”? thou hast made thy abode*® then* on*! the tops*° of
the mountains” (for chanting) the commandments™ of the Holy Spell*® for a
long time**. (27) O Hom*’, Lord of the house*’, street, town, country!
(and) through wisdom” Lord of knowledge™! I think® of thee® for courage™
and victory®, and for (gaining) happiness” full of enjoyments” for my*”’
body®. (28) (O Hom!) do thou carry us“ away”*” from the wickedness” of
wicked (men)”. Do thou carry away far?” (my) thought” (from the
wickedness) of “poisonous (men)**. And any® vindictive man*° whatever®
may be® in this® house™, street®’, town” (and) country”, do thou take away”
strength’ from his® legs”, do thou “‘cover* his? intellect? and do thou
render® his® mental faculty’ broken to pieces*. (29) (O Hom!) do not? grant’!
to both the legs (of that person) nor’? bestow power" to both the hands (of
that person) who” injures“ our? mind”, harms our’? body*°; (that person)
cannot’* see’’ the earth'® with (his two eyes'’); (that person) cannot"’ see “*the
world” with (his) two eyes”.

(30) Paiti*! azdish? zairitahe*® simahe* vishévaépahe*> kehrpem”*
nashemnai*”’ ashaone*, Haoma*® zaire*, vadare*! jaidhi?. Paiti*
gadhahe“ _—vivarezdavato* _khrvishyato*“’ zazarano”, kehrpem®
nashemnai” ashaone™®, Haoma™ zaire’, vadare® jaidhi™. (31) Paiti*
mashyehe® drvato sastarsh** aiwi-voizdayantahe” kameredhem”,
kehrpem® nashemnai” ashaone®, Haoma™ zaire®, vadare® jaidhi®.
Paiti® ashemaoghahe® anashaond” ahiim-merenchd”, anghao”
daénaya6” mas-vacha”™ dathanahe”, noit” shyaothnaish” apayantahe”,

atd i.e. Thou dost not doubt truthfulness.
ate Taking gramentam, Mills translates, “angry enemies”; “infuriated” (Darmesteter).
atf i.e. render his intellect dim or faint.

atg i.e. the entire creation. The meaning of gam is also “cattle”.


--- Page 311 ---

HOM YASHT LARGE 295

kehrpem®* nashemnai*! ashaone*®, Haoma® zaire™ vadare® jaidhi®. (32)
Paiti®’ jahikayai® yatu maityai®, maodhano-kairyai” upashta-bairyai”',
yenghe” fra-fravaiti® mano”, yatha®> awrem” vatd-shitem”’, kehrpem”®
nashemnai” ashaone’” Haoma! zaire’ vadare’ jaidhi*. Yat® he® kehrpem’
nashemnai® ashaone’, Haoma” zaire" vadare” jaidhi’.

(30) Against*! the green*’, dreadful®*, (and) poison-producing* serpent® do
thou smite? the weapon*! O green*® Hom*! *"for protecting®” the body** of
righteous (men). Against* the robber“, acting contrary (to the Law)*®,
bloodthirsty’ (and) tormenting’ do thou smite™, O green Hom*!! the weapon™
for protecting” the body** of righteous (men)*’. (31) Against®* the head® of the
man* unbelieving®’ (i.e. wicked), the oppressor®*, (and) injurious, do thou
smite’ the weapon®, O green® Hom™! for protecting” the body” of righteous™
(men). Against®™ the heretic”, unrighteous”, world-destroying” (who though)
“bearing” in mind” the commandments” of this religion (of Hormazd and
revealed by Zarathushtra) (Yet) never” “/applying” through actions”, do thou
smite’, O green** Hom*! the weapon*® for protecting*! the body® of righteous
(men)®. (32) Against the wicked woman*®, full of magic*’, delighting in lusty
desires”, lustful?', whose” mind™ tosses about” like® the wind-driven’ clouds”,
do thou smite*, O green? Hom!! the weapon’. Do thou smite’? her’? the weapon”,
O green'! Hom"! for protecting® the body’ of righteous (men).

(Kardah II) (1) Vish! apam? idha® patentu’ vi daévaonghd° vi’
daévayo®; vanghush’ Sraoshd'’ mitayatu", Ashish Vanguhi’ idha'
mithnatu’; Ashish Vanguhi ramayat'® idha'’ upa'’® imat'’? nmanem”,
yat?! Ahiiri?? yat?? Haomahe* ashavazangho”. (2) Frataremchit?® te?’
havanem’® vacha” upa-staomi*®  hukhratvo*', yo? asush®
hangéurvayeiti*; uparemchit® te** havanem*’ vacha* upa-staomi’®
hukhratvo*” yahmi*' nighne*® narsh® aojangha*. (3) Staomi*
maéghemcha* varemcha*’, ya‘* te” kehrpem*’ vakhshayato*',
bareshnush” paiti*> gairinam™; staomi* garayo berezanto*’ yathra®
Haoma® ururudhusha™. (4) Staomi®' zam® perethwim® pathanam™
verezyahgham®, khvaparam® barethrim® te Haoma® ashaum”;
staomi’! zem6” yatha”? raodhahe” hubaoidhish® aurv6” charanem”.
Uta’ Mazdao” huruthma” Haoma*® raose*! gara® paiti®; uta*
fradhaésha® vish-patha®*; haithimcha®’ ashahe®® khao® ahi’. (5)
Veredhyanguha*! mana” vacha™, vispescha™ paiti’’ vareshajish’®,
vispescha” paiti® fraspareghe”, vispescha™ paiti' fravakhshe?. Mana
vacha vispescha paiti vareshajish, vispescha paiti fraspareghe, vispescha
paiti fravakhshe.

ath Original meaning: “for the righteous (man) in order to protect (his) body”. Nashemndi: The
root of the word ndshemndi is Sanskrit nash = to render free from danger-anxiety.

ati Or remembering the thought and the verse of the religion (dvandva compound).

atj Original meaning “not attaining to actions”, root ap = Sanskrit ap = to reach.


--- Page 312 ---

296 KHORDEH AVESTA

(1) Hereafter? may the demons® (and) ““demonesses’ run away “afar”!

May the good’ obedience" (or the good’ Sraosha yazata'®) stay!’ (here)! May
(the yazata) Ashishvangh”” stay'* here’*! May ““Ashishvangh’* bestow joy
(or happiness)'® upon this’? house”? which”! (is) of Ahura” (and) of Hom”,
giving “strength of righteousness*. (2) O (Hom) of good wisdom"! I
praise*® with the word” (of prayer) the first®* act of thy?’ ““first”’ pressing”
sprout when” is held**. O (Hom) of good wisdom“! I praise*’ with the
word** (of prayer) the second*® act of thy** pressing’ by which (work)"' I
smite” (the demons) with manly* strength“! (3) I praise** the cloud*® and the
rain’? which** make thy” body” increase*! on* the tops’ of the mountains”
where*™ thou, O Hom! hast grown up”.

(4) O righteous” Hom! I praise®! thy® self-supporting® mother®’ (which
is) extensive’, broadband fertile® earth”. I praise” different portions of the
earth”, where’ thou growest” spreading (thy) renowned” fragrance” on the
fields”. Also’ as the good creation of Ahura Mazda”, O Hom! Thou
growest*! on® the mountains’. (O Hom!) mayest thou flourish®* also™
towards the pathways of birds*®*. Verily*’ thou art” the “’source of righteous-
ness*’. (5) (O Hom!) with (the power of) the word (of) my” (prayer)?
increase thou”! in® all” (thy) stalks”, in®® all°’ branches” and in! all’ twigs’.

(6) Haomo? ukhshyeiti* stavand*, atha® na’ yo® dim’ staoiti!
verethrajastar6" bavaiti’?. Nitemachit'? Haoma"™ hiitish, nitemachit'®
Haoma” stiitish'’, nitemachit'? Haoma” khvaretish?', hazangraghnyai”
asti? daévanim”. (7) Nasyeiti? hathra” frakeresta?” ahmat® hacha”
nmanat” 4hitish*', yathra” badha* upazaiti*‘, yathra** badha*
upastaoiti*’”, Haomahe* baéshazyehe” chithrem“, dasvare*' baéshazem™”
ahe® vise“ uta** maéthanem*. (8) Vispe zi anye madhaonghd aéshma
hachinte* khrvi-drvé; aat hd yO Haomahe madho asha* hachaite
urvasmana. Renjaiti Haomahe madho. YO yatha puthrem taurunem
Haomem vandaéta mashyd, fra 4byd tanubyo Haom6 visaite baéshazai.

(6) (When Hom is) praised, Hom? grows, for this reason®; the man’, who®
praises'° him? becomes’? most victorious’. O Hom"! (thy) least act of
pressing the juice'*, O Hom"! (thy) least’® praise'*, O Hom”! (thy) least!*

atk Demon-worshipper (Darmesteter); associates of the demons (Pahlavi).
atl The word vish in the beginning of this paragraph is another form of vi too.
atm Yazata Ashishvang is the yazata presiding over riches, happiness and piety.

atn For the explanation of the word ashavazangho, see note to Hom Yash Large, introductory
paragraph.

ato From Pahlavi. Havanim, i.e. the mortar and the pestle for pounding Haoma. Taking both
these as two different things Prof. Darmesteter translates frataremchit havanem as the “lower
havana” i.e. hdvanim = mortar and uparemchit havanem as the “upper havana” i.e. the pestle.

atp Vedic rtasya kha (Darmesteter). “Fountains of truth” (Mills). For comparison, see Beheram
yasht, Karda 11 (erezdish khao).


--- Page 313 ---

HOM YASHT LARGE 297

drinking?! ““‘are*? a thousand-fold destruction” of the demons. (7) To
whatever places* (one) carries** assuredly** the health-giving*®? Hom* and to
whatever places** (one) verily** praises*’ (him), from’ that*® house* (all)
contamination*! created?’ (by the demons) disappears” at once”, (and) in
his* family“ as* in (his) residence*® (come) happiness" (and) health”
openly*’. (8) For** intoxications” (of) all*” other? (kinds) lead** to (demon)
Aeshma®' of infuriate weapon*’; but® that®> which® is the intoxication™ of
Hom?’ leads® to delight®' (and) righteousness*’. The intoxication™ of Hom®
makes (us) agile”.

Explanation:- (By taking all kinds of liquors and intoxicating substances
the mind is excited and thereby fury and wrath are produced, by which
destruction arises, but the intoxication produced by drinking the juice of
Haoma prepared through ceremony is most pleasant and in its joy and
delight a man is incited to perform virtuous and good deeds).

To (that) man’! who® “praises” Hom® like® (his) young® son®’ Hom™
enters’ into his” body” for giving health”.

(9) Haoma” dazdi” me” baéshazanam®, yabyo*' ahi® baéshazadao*;
Haoma* dazdi* me varethraghninam®’, yabyd* ahi® verethra-
taurvao”. Fra te?! visai®? urvathd* staota“, urvathem® staotarem”™
vanghanghem’’ dadho” aokhta” Ahurd Mazdao'™ yatha' Ashem? yat®
Vahishtem*. (10) Aurvantem® thwa*® damidhatem’ baghdé* tatashat?
hvapao”; aurvantem" thwa' damidhatem’ baghd" midathat's
hvapao", Haraithyd” paiti'® barezayao”. (11) Aat? thwa”! athra” spenta
fradakhshta® meregha™ vizvancha”® vibaren”; avi?’ ishkata”* upairi-
saéna”, avi’ staéra*! starésaéra” avi kusrat** kusré-patat*, avi*
pawrana” vish-patha*’, avi spita-gaona” gairi“'.

(9) O Hom”! do thou grant’* me” means of gaining health* for which®
thou art (known) as the giver of health’, O Hom™! do thou grant** me*®
means of gaining victory®’ for which® thou art® (known) as the smiter of the
enemy”. (O Hom!) I shall become” thy*! friendly®’ (or devoted**) praiser™,
(for) Ahura Mazda! has called® the friendly® praiser®® as the better?’
creation’’ than' Asha Vahishta**. (10) The Lord® practising good deeds'° has
fashioned? thee® agile’ and wise’; the Lord'* practising good deeds'® has ap-
pointed'> thee’? on'* the (Mount) Alburz'’'® as agile’! (and) bestower of
wisdom’. (11) From there” the birds* ““bringing good omen” carried’®
thee?’ then’ away, (O Hom!) to all directions”.

Explanation:- (About which places they are it is mentioned below:-)

atq i.e. preparing Hom by pounding and squeezing in accordance with the ritual methods, by
singing the hymn of praise in his honour and drinking it, sickness, etc., are vanished.

atr Shows caress - love (Mills); behaves, regards (Prof. Darmesteter).

ats Or bringing pleasant news, having holy or divine characteristics (original meaning).


--- Page 314 ---

298 KHORDEH AVESTA

(O Hom!) The birds™ bringing good omen* carried”® thee away”® to’’
Ishkata’® (and) to the mountain (Mehe-) Parsin”’, to*? (the mountain) Staera*!
as high as the star*’, to*? Kusra* or to® the paths of (the mountain) Kusra*’,
to (the mountain) Pawrana with such narrow paths where birds alone can
go*’, and to® the “mountain*’ Spita-gaona”’.

(12) Aat?? ahva** paurvatahva® pouru-saredhd” viraodhahe*',
Haom6” gaoma® zairi-gaon6“; ate* baéshaza“ iririthare’’ Vanghéush
Manangho*® mayabyo”. Aat®’ me! ahe* dush-sanghahe® paracha
vaépaya™ mano*™; aat® ahe*’ ni** mand” mand”, yo" me” dush-sangho®
hishtaite™.

(12) O “savoury® and golden-hued* Hom”! then*’ thou growest*! on
these** lofty places* in various kinds“; through the virtues (or the wondrous
powers”) of Vohu Manah* health-giving characteristics*® ““are produced*’
from thee*. Then*® *““destroy thou™ that slandering® thought* of mine*!;
(and) do thou “subjugate the thought of “him” who*' stands“ as my”
slanderer® (i.e. makes calumny of me).

(13) Nemo® Haomai® yat*’ kerenaoiti® drighaosh® hvat-maso”
mano”, yatha” raévastemahechit”?; nemo” Haomai”™, yat” kerenaoiti”
drighaosh® hvat-mas6” mano”, yat*' usnam® aéiti® vaédhya*. Pouru-
narem® tum*® kereniishi*®’ spanyanghem® chistivastarem®, yase’-te”!
badha”, Haoma® zaire™“, gava®> iristahe® bakhshaiti’’. (14) Ma’ me”
yatha’ gaush' drafsh6? Asitd? varem* achaire’. Frasha‘ frayantu’ te®
madho’, verezyanghaongho” jasentu". Pairi'-te’ Haoma'™ ashaum'
ashavazo", dadhami!’ imam’ tanim”, ya”? me?! vaénaite” huraodha”.
(15) Avanghare-zami* janydish*® wtnam mairyayao”’ évitd-
kharedhayao”*, ya” mainyeinti*® davayeinti*! athravanemcha™®
Haomemcha® ha* ya* dapta* apanasyeiti*’. Ya°* tat yat*” Haomahe*!
draond” nigdonghenti* nishhidhaiti*, noit* tam* athravo-puthrim”’
naédha* dasti*” huputhrim™.

(13) Homage® (be) unto Haoma®! who*’ makes® the mind”! of the poor
man® equally great” as that of the richest (man)”. Homage”™ (be) unto

att According to Professors Harlez and Darmesteter, Dr. Spiegel and Reverend Mills have trans-
lated these words as:- ishkata = top of a mountain; upairi-saéna = higher than the flight of the
eagle; staéra = hill; kusra = the gorge of a mountain; pawrdna = lofty place. Spita gaona gairi =
the white-coloured mountain, the mountain covered with mist and clouds. See Spitavarendoscha
(Zamyad yasht, para 6).

atu Darmesteter; white as milk (Rev. Mills); sweet (Dr. Spiegel); full of juice (Professor Harlez).

atv For the inspiration of religious-minded men health-giving fluid is oozing out from thee (Rev.
Mills)

atw Original meaning “take off the roots” (root para-vip).

atx Professor Harlez: This scholar deems it proper to take the reading vi nama mano instead of
ni mano mano. vi-nama. i.e. do thou turn down - subdue (imperative); root nam.


--- Page 315 ---

HOM YASHT LARGE 299

Haoma”™! who makes” the mind® of the poor man” so great” that*! it soars*®
high® (i.e. thinks highly) owing to knowledge™. O yellow™ Hom®**! thou®®
makest*’ him rich*, wise** and intelligent® who” indeed” “dedicates” a
product produced” from the cow” (i.e. milk).

(14) O! Hom Mayest thou not disappear from me suddenly like the drops
of milk in *’rain''. May thy*® healing remedies’ proceed’ further® and may
reach (us) effectively’! O Hom, holy’ and giving strength or
righteousness'*! I dedicate!’ to thee’? this'® (my) body! which” appears”
beautiful”? to me”!. (15) I throw away™ the ““insufficiency” of an evil female
spirit of serpentine nature?’ (and) wicked senses**, who” (i.e. the evil
female spirit) “*intends* to deceive*! the athravan - (priest)*? and Hom*?; and
having deceived* (them) she** vanishes*’. (Hom) does *“not grant (priestly)
children*”? and virtuous progeny” to her*® who** sits down” to eat
irreligiously* the sacred cake” of Hom"! (i.e. sacred cake consecrated in
honour of Hom).

(16) Panchanim* ahmi*, panchanam® ndit™ ahmi*. Humatahe~°
ahmi*’, dushmatahe* ndit® ahmi®. Hikhtahe’ ahmi®, duzhikhtahe®
noit* ahmi®. Hvarshtahe® ahmi®’, duzhvarshtahe® ndit® ahmi”.
Sraoshahe” ahmi”, asrushtdish” ndit’ ahmi”®. Ashaond” ahmi”,
drvato” noit” ahmi®*. Atchit ahmat*' yatha® apemem® manivao*™
anghat® nivaitish®.

(16) Of the five matters*' I am® (in agreement); of the five matters” I am
not™ (in agreement)*. I am*’ (in agreement) with good thought*®, I am® not®
(in agreement) with wicked thought®*. I am® (in agreement) with good
word*',1 am® not™ (in agreement) with wicked word®. I am® (in agreement)
with obedience’ (to the Religion); I am’ not” (in agreement) with
disobedience” (to the Religion). I am” (in agreement) with a righteous
(person)’*®; I am® not” (in agreement) with a wicked person (i.e. sinful
person)’*. As long as’ the most ultimate® rivalry®® of (these) two spirits®
(Spena Mino and Angra Mino) will end®*, so long*! (I will remain as stated
above).

aty Prof. Harlez and Dr. Mills, - by taking bakhshditi from root bakhsh = Sanskrit bhakhsh = to
eat, to swallow, - translates this way: ““Whoso drinks thee mixed with milk”.

atz Professor Harlez and Dr. Mills. “Mayest thou not become like the banner (made) from the
leather of the ox; mayest thou not separate quickly from me” (Prof. Darmesteter). Its signific-
ance is interpreted in such a way that O Hom! may thy invigorating influence remain perman-
ently in my body by drinking in accordance with the rite and may it not depart. There is a refer-
ence to the above mentioned flag which was the leather apron of the blacksmith, Kaveh occur-
ring in the Shah Nameh which was subsequently converted into the flag, remarks Darmesteter.

aua i.e. indigence produced by the wicked female spirit.
aub Original meaning “thinks and deceives”.

auc For its opposite, see yasna Ha IX, para 22.


--- Page 316 ---

300 KHORDEH AVESTA

(17) Aat®’ aokhta** Zarathushtro®, nemo Haomai®! Mazdadhatai”.
Vanghush® Haomo™ Mazdadhato”*. Nemo** Haomai’’. Vispe’®> Haoma”
upa-staomi’”, yatchit! bareshnushva’ gairinam’, yatchit+ jafnushva‘
raonam’, yaéchit’ anzahu® deretaéonghd’ jaininam'’’ upa derezahu".
Erezataéna” hacha™ tashta’ zaranaénem' avi'® takhshe'’?; ma'® te”?
nire”” zemi?' paiti”, itha** raévantd* arejahe*. (18) Imaose’-te?’
Haoma* gathao”, imao” henti*! staomayd”, imao* henti**
chichashanao* ime** henti>? arshikhdha*®® vachd*. Dasmainish”
varethraghnish", paiti-bishish’, baéshazya®.

(19) Imaose“ timchit* mavoya*. Frasha”’ frayantu* te” madho™,
raokhshna*! frayantu” te madho™; renjyo™ vazaite*’ madho-’.
Varethraghnish® hentem” Astaoite®, hathra®' ana® gathwya® vacha™.
(20) Gave® nemd”, gave” nem6®, gave” ukhdhem”, gave’! verethrem”,
gave” khvaretem™, gave’ vastrem”, gave” verezyatam”™ tam” né*°
khvarethai*! fshuyo*. (21) Haomem® zairim*™ berezantem® yazamaide*;
Haomem’*’ frashmim*® fradat-gaéthem® yazamaide”; Haomem”! dira-
oshem” yazamaide”’; vispe’ Haoma® yazamaide”; Zarathushtrahe”
Spitamahe” idha” ashaond'™ ashimcha! fravashimcha’ yazamaide’.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(17) Thereupon*’ spoke® Zarathushtra®: Obeisance” (be) unto Hom*!
created by Ahura Mazda”! Hom™ created by Ahura Mazda® (is) good”.
Homage” (be) unto Hom’*’! I praise’ Hom”, and all kinds** which! (grow)
on the tops’ of the mountains®, in the depths? of the valleys®, in the narrow
places® of the gorge of the hills’, (situated) in the fetters'' of “the wicked
female spirits'’. (O Hom!) I pour’’ (thee) (or I filter thee’’) from’? the silver!”
saucer’ to the golden one’*'’. (O Hom!) I do not'® pour” thee’? on” ground”!
because” (thou art) precious”.

(18) O Hom”*! these**are*! Gathas” for thee’; these*® hymns of praise**
and these tasty *“meals* are*! (for thee); (and) these*® truly-spoken*
(prayers) are*’ (for thee).

Explanation:- (We dedicate unto thee; the hymns of praise, the prayer
performed with a sincere heart and tasty meals, O Hom!)

(O Hom! thou art) comfort giving”, the giver of victory*! (or the strength
of smiting the enemy)", fighting against malice” and healing*®.

aud Jaini means wicked female spirit, “a woman of devilish nature; the adversary of Haoma”
(Justi); “the feminine incarnation of vice and disease” (Darmesteter).

aue Root chash = Persian chasidan = to taste; or teachings, matters of admonition; root chash =
Sanskrit chakhsh = to teach.


--- Page 317 ---

HOM YASHT LARGE 301

(19) “All these are pertaining to me, so also thou”*". (O Hom!) it would
be better if thy” “*means of removing diseases” proceed* further*’! It would
be better’? if thy? means of removing diseases™ spread® with brilliance*'!
(Thy) means of removing the diseases*’ are easily** available’. (Any one
who) praises® (Hom) along with®' these’ hymns“ of the Gathas®
“b(becomes) victorious*®, and “agile®’. (20) Homage® (be) unto the cattle!
(Good) words”, Victory” Food” and Clothing’® (be) unto the cattle”! We
“imust strive’ hard for the cattle’ (because) they” are fostering*
(promoting) our® food®'.

(21) We praise* the green™ (and) exalted** Hom*; we praise’ Hom*’, the
prosperity-bringer® (and) the promoter of the world®’. We praise’? Hom®
warding off sickness”’. We praise” all°* Homs® (i.e. Hom of different kinds).
We worship with reverence? here” the holiness! of the Holy! Zarathushtra”’
Spitama”™ and (his) Fravashi’.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud) Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha afrinami, Haomahe
ashavazangho. Ashem Vohi 1. Ahmai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me
avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi. 1.

Gorje khoreh awazayad Hom yazad berasad am§vand pirozgar
amavandih pirozgarl. Dad din beh Mazdayasnan, agahi ravai
goafarangani bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man 4no Avayad

shudan, man ano Avayad shudan, man 4no Aavayad shudan. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite facing the south): Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarathushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sira Anahite. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem6 urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.
Haomem zairim berezantem yazamaide; Haomem frashmim fradat-
auf Mills. Do thou grant me thy intoxication as reward (Darmesteter).
aug Or healing remedies. The meaning of madho is also wisdom.
auh The person who praises Hom becomes very victorious (see para 6).
aui Meaning of hentem may be taken as the adjective “live”.

auj For its explanation, see Beheram yasht, Karda 20.


--- Page 318 ---

302 KHORDEH AVESTA

gatthem yazamaide; Haomem diraoshem yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 1.
Hom yazad berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

HOM YASHT SMALL
Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdin Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh
awazayad; Hom yazad berasad.

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tant
ravani geti mindani, okhe avakhsh pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazd4o, tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashdtemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem
Vohii 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévé Ahura-tkaésh6o (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Haomahe
“Kashavazanghod, khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha
frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi VairyOd zaota fra-me mrite, atha ratush
ashat-chit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti. Haomem zairim
berezantem yazamaide; Haomem frashmim fradat-gaéthem yazamaide;
Haomem diraoshem yazamaide.

INI te!? zaire'? madhem"™ mruye'’. "Ni amem!*, ni verethraghne”’,
ni dasvare!®, ni baéshazem”; ni fradathem”, ni varedathem”’, ni aojo”
VispoOtanim”, ni mastim’ vispd-paésanghem”, ni tat, yatha’
gaéthahva” vaso-khshathro” fracharane™, tbaésh6-taurvao*' drujem-
vano™. Nr tat*4 yatha*® *"taurvayeni”®.

auk For its translation and explanation, see first note to Hom Yasht Large introductory para-
graph.

aul The words from here up to drujem-vano occurring in the same para are taken here from
yasna Ha 9, para 17, and the words ni tat yatha taurvayeni are taken from para 18 of the same
Ha.

aum The prefix ni which has occurred in this para repeatedly is to be understood as ni mruye; ni
mruye, “TI request”.

aun ni tat yatha taurvayeni - this sentence is taken here incomplete from the Large Hom Yasht;
the sense cannot be made out fully without taking the undermentioned words (which are found
in the Large Hom yasht) after it. There is no object of the verb taurvayeni (I may overcome),
without taking it the sentence remains incomplete -vispanam tbaeshavatam tbaeshao, daevanam
mashyanamcha, yathwam pairikanamcha, sathram kaoyam karafnamcha mairyanadmcha,
bizangranam ashemaogha nadmcha_ bizangranadm, vehrkandmcha_ chathware-zangranam,
haénaydoscha perethu-ainikaydo davaithyao pataithydao. The translation of the this entire sen-
tence:- “I ask for (all) that (i.e. strength, health, greatness, wisdom, courage, etc., mentioned in
this paragraph) so that I may overcome the malice of all enemies, demons, mortals, wizards and
witches, of tyrants, the kiks, the karaps, men having the nature of serpents, heretical persons,


--- Page 319 ---

HOM YASHT SMALL 303

O green-hued'* (Hom!) I request'> (pray for) all these (or) “of thee’:
wisdom", courage’®, victory’’, “"health'*, means of gaining health’,
prosperity”, increase*!, strength” of the entire body” (and) greatness™
possessing all kinds of brillance’, so that’’ (i.e. by gaining them) I may move
about® (or I may rule*’) like an independent Sovereign’, the destroyer of
malice*! (and) the vanquisher of the druj, in (all) lands”’. I ask for* (all) that*#
(i.e. strength, health, greatness, wisdom, etc., so that*> I may overcome”* (the
malice of all the demons, wizards, tyrants, etc.)

Haomem zairim berezantem yazamaide; Haomem frashmim fradat-
gatthem yazamaide; Haomem diraoshem yazamaide; vispe Haoma
yazamaide; Zarathushtrahe Spitamahe idha ashaond ashimcha
fravashimcha yazamaide.*™™4

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aedin bad. (To recite aloud): Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Afrinadmi Haomahe
ashavazangho. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush; Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje Khoreh awazayaid Hom yazad berasad, amavand pirozgar
amavandih pirozgarl. Dad din beh Mazdayasnan, agahi ravai
goafarangani bad hafte keshvar zamin; aediin bad. Man 4no Avayad
shudan, man ano Avayad shudan, man 4no Aavayad shudan. Ashaone
Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite, facing the southern direction): didare gehan dine Mazdayasni

four-legged wolves (and) of the army with an extensive battle-array, deceiving and rushing
onwards.” | think that it would be better if the above-mentioned suitable Avestan words of the
Large Hom yasht be recited after reciting ni tat yatha taurvayeni, whilst reciting this Small Hom
yasht; otherwise the sentence would be incomplete with-the object.

auo From para 17 of the First Kardah of Large Hom yasht it may be taken as such.
aup i.e. the health gained by drinking the Hom juice.
auq For its translation, see the last part of the Large Hom yasht.


--- Page 320 ---

304 KHORDEH AVESTA

dade Zarathushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sira Andahite
ashaone. Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem6 urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone. Ashem Vohi 1.

Haomem zairim berezantem yazamaide; Haomem frashmim fradat-
gatthem yazamaide; Haomem diraoshem yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 1.
Hom yazad berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

NIRANG OF HOM YASHT

(This Nirang may be recited three times after reciting Large or Small
Hom Yasht).

Ku shekanam, O vaenum, O nezar kunam kalbude’ shuma divan,
O” darujan O jaduan O parian'’, pa Hom va barsam, va dine rast va
dorost veh, ke Dadar Ahura Mazda oe man chashid ashaone Ashem
Vohi 1. (To recite three times).

I break, I smite and I render powerless® the body’ of you®, demons’, and'®
drujas!’, the wizards’? and'* witches’ by means of'® Hom!’ and Barsam!®
and’? by means of'® the true? and*? perfect** good” religion*' which the
Creator Ahura Mazda (through the agency of the Prophet Zarathushtra)
taught”? me”’.

VANANT YASHT
*""Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdan Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini gorje khoreh
awazayad; Vanant Star Ahura Mazda datha ashava ashahe rad
berasad.*“ Az hama4 gunah patet pashemanum; az harvastin dushmata
dizhukhta duzhvarshta. Mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem
jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani geti mmOani, okhe awakhsh pasheman, pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazd4o, tardidite angrahe mainyéush;
Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashdtemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem
Vohii 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévé Ahura-tkaésh6o (Gah
according to the period of the day), frasastayaécha. Vanantd Staro

aur In the Small and Large Siroza yashts are incorporated the “Khshnumans” of Vanant,
Satavaesa and Haptoiranga; on the basis of this Professor Darmesteter has regarded this yasht as
an appendage of Tir yasht. Looking to its contents this yasht can be considered as a “‘nirang”
(i.e. an incantation) of driving away the noxious creatures and harmful animals.

aus i.e. may the holy star Vanant, created by Ahura Mazda, (who is) the Lord of righteousness,
come (unto my help)! For the explanation of the Star Vanant, see note to Khorshed yasht para -
graph 8.


--- Page 321 ---

VANANT YASHT 305

Mazdadhatahe,™ khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha khshnaothraicha
frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota fra-me mrite, atha ratush
ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti.

Vanantem! starem’ Mazdadhatem* ashavanem‘ ashahe* ratiim‘
yazamaide’. Yazai® Vanantem’ amavantem'? aokhtd-namanem"!
baéshazim”™ paitishtatée ajastacha zdizdishtacha'’> apayantamahe-
cha!’ angrahe mainyéush” khrafastra'®. (Clap Once). Vanantem starem?
Mazdadhatem? ashavanem* ashahe* ratiim® yazamaide’. Yazai®
Vanantem’ amavantem’ aokhtd namanem", baéshazim"™ paitishtatée™
ajastacha™ zoizdishtacha'’, apayantamahecha’’ angrahe mainyeush”
khrafastra’®. (Clap Twice). Vanantem! starem? Mazdadhatem?
ashavanem* ashahe* ratiim® yazamaide’. Yazai® Vanantem’? amavantem”
aokhto namanem" baéshazim” paitishtatée'? ajastacha™ zoisdishtacha",
apayantamahecha" angrahe”’ mainyéush' khrafastra!®. (Clap Thrice).

We praise’ the Star? ““Vanant', created by Ahura Mazda’, holy*, Lord® of
holiness®. I praise’ (the Star) Vanant’, courageous’®, ““Yof the famous name"!
(and) health-giving’’, for withstanding’ the accursed'* and worst'> noxious
creatures'* of the most repulsive'® Angra Mainyu!’ (i.e. of the creation of
Angra Mainyu).

(To recite in baz) *“““Basta hom! dam? dehan? mushak‘* kul’ gurbeh‘,
ku’ pa khan® gunah? nakunand". Baéshaza" goafrangan” bad’. Name
Ahura Mazda", pa name!’ niv’’ khoreh”” Faridun'’, Faridun’ Athavyan.
(Clap Thrice). Basta hom?! dam” dehan” maran* mar” sardagan”, ku?’
pa khan” gunah” nakunand”. Baéshaza goafarangan bad. Name Ahura
Mazda, pa name niv khoreh Faridun, Faridun Athavyan. (Clap Thrice).
Basta hom“! dam*” dehan® gorgan* gorg* sardagan*, nam cheshti”’
gorg* kul® gorbeh®, ku’! pa khan” gunah** nakunand™ baéshaza
goafrangan bad. Name Ahura Mazda, pa name niv khoreh Faridun,
Faridun Athavyan. (Clap Thrice). Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum,
mardum sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin
mazdayasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud):
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha Aafrinami, Vananto Staro
Mazdadhatahe. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh

aut i.e. For the worship of Star Vanant, created by Ahura Mazda, for his praise, etc. (see Khor-
shed Nyayesh).

auu For the explanation of the Star Vanant, see glossary.
auv Or invoked by his special name.

auw The portion of reciting in baz from here up to the words “‘aediin bad” coming at the end of
this paragraph is in Pazend.


--- Page 322 ---

306 KHORDEH AVESTA

Mozd.

I bind! the mouths? (of the animals); creatures? of all° (kinds) mice* and
cats® so that they’ do not create’? harm’ in the house*. May there be! (unto
me) health! (and) fame”! Through the name of the (Creator) Ahura Mazda"
and through the name’ of the power'® and glory’’ of Faridun’’, (the son) of
Athawyan”? (I bind*” the mouths of all mice and cats).

I bind”! the mouths” of serpents™ and species”® of serpents”, (of animals)
and creatures”, so that they”’ do not create*® harm* in the house**.1 bind“! the
mouths of wolves“ and species*® of wolves*, specially*’ of all” wolves*
(and) cats*°, so that they*' do not “’create™ harm® in the house®.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush; haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje Khoreh awazayad Vanant Star Ahura Mazda datha ashava
ashahe rad berasad amavand pirozgar amavandih pirozgari. Dad din
beh Mazdayasnan, 4gahi ravai goafrangani bad hafte keshvar zamin
aediin bad. Man 4no Aavayad shudan; man 4no Avayad shudan, man 4no
avayad shudan, ashaone Ashem Vohii 1.

(Facing the southern direction, recite:) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni
dade Zarathushti, nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sura Andahite
ashaone. Ashem Vohi 1.

Nem urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone. Ashem Vohi 1.

Vanantem Starem Mazdadhatem ashavanem ashahe_ ratim
yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 1. Vanant Star Ahura Mazda datha ashava
ashahe rad berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

NIRANG OF VANANT YASHT

auz,

(This Nirang should be recited three times after the recitation of Vanant
Yasht).

Kul bala dafe shavad, O div O daruj O pari O kaftar O seheran, O

aux According to later books King Faridun was an erudite teacher of all kinds of nirangs,
through the help of which, i.e. through the recitation of those nirangs he could prevent any diffi-
culty whatever coming upon him, and did not allow the evils of the demons and drujas to suc -
ceed over him. Moreover, in some books, he is even designated as a prophet.

auy I have not given again the translation of the portion from “baéshaza goafrangan bad” up to
“Faridun athavyan” having given above.

auz This entire Nirang appears to have been composed at a very later period; its wording is
rather complicated. Also Arabic words, are employed in it along with Pazend words:- e.g. Kul,
bala, dafe, seheran, shaitan, etc.


--- Page 323 ---

NIRANG OF VANANT YASHT 307

bad akhtahed akhi darde shekam haft andam, khalale Shaitan O khatar
parishan, O khalale demagh shaitan khatar parishan bad; O dar nazar
barvizan ta didane navasht O manand hamchunin bala dafe shavad.
Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1. (To recite three times).

All the calamities, the demons, drujas, fairies, witches,wizards, bad wind,
pain, stomach pain and pain of the seven limbs of the body, evil produced by
the Evil Spirit, woes of the heart and sickness of the brain, bad wind
producing uneasiness of the mind, evil eye and evil resulted by seeing
wicked men, and such other similar calamities may vanish and disappear!

SIROZA YASHT

Explanation: In the Siroza yasht the remaining 28 small and large
Khshnumans - propitiatory formulas are included - except the Khshnumans
of Srosh and Farvardin and the small and large Khshnumans of Barjo, Hom
and Daham, as Khshnumans as well as the Chapter of Stoom to be recited in
honour of the departed souls (yasna Ha 26). The reason for dropping out the
Khshnumans of Srosh and Farvardin:-

The Baz of Siroza can be consecrated by 4 drons - sacred unleavened
bread made of wheat flour - whilst in the Baz of Srosh 6 drons are required.
For this reason from the Baz of Siroza the Khshnuman of Srosh is dropped
out. The Khshnuman of Srosh from the Siroza yasht is also dropped out.
Besides, after the recitation of the Khshnuman of Daham there comes at the
end the Khshnuman of Farvardin (ashaunam fravashinam .
nabanazdishtanam fravashinam); the Khshnuman of Farvardin is therefore,
not recited in the middle.

Moreover, it is necessary to note that the translation of the Khshnumans
which has occurred in various yashts of this book, was not given again, but
references to the pages of that Khshnuman as well as its translation are
mentioned. The translation of the rest of the Khshnumans is given.

Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao. Ashem Vohi 1.

Pa name yazdin Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh
awazayad; Siroza Ameshaspand Vispaésha ardafravash berasad.

Az hama gunah patet pashemanum az harvastin dushmata duzh-
ukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem goft, oem kard, oem jast,
oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni gavashni kunashni, tani
ravani gett mmdant. Okhe avakhsh pashemAén, pa sé gavashni pa patet
hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush,
haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi
3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaév6 Ahura tkaésho (Gah


--- Page 324 ---

308 KHORDEH AVESTA

according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. (1) Ahurahe Mazdao
raévatd khvarenanguhatd, Ameshanaim Spentanadm. (2) Vanghave
Mananghe akhshtdish hamvaintyaéo, taradhatd anydish daman, asnahe
khrathwo Mazdadhatahe, gaosh0-sritahe khrathwod Mazdadhatahe. (3)
Ashahe Vahishtahe sraéshtahe, Airyamand ishyehe siirahe Mazda-
dhatahe, Saokayao vanghuyao vouru-ddithrayao Mazdadhatayao
ashonyao. (4) Khshathrahe Vairyehe ayOkhshustahe marezdikai thrayo-
drigaove. (5) Spentayao vanghuyao Armatidish ratayao vanghuyao
vouru-dodithrayao Mazdadhatayao ashaonyao. (6) Haurvatatd rathwod
yairyayao hushitdish, saredhatibyo ashahe ratubyd. (7) Ameretatd
rathwo fshaonibya vathvabya, aspinibya yaonibya gaokerenahe siirahe
Mazdadhatahe.

(During the Havan Gah as well as during the Second Havan, recite as
under):-

Mithrahe Vouru-gaoyaoitdish, Ramanascha khvastrahe.

(During the Gah of Rapithwan, recite as under):-

Ashahe Vahishtahe Athrascha Ahurahe Mazdao.

(If the Gah be Uzirin, recite as under):-

Berezatod Ahurahe nafedhro apam apascha Mazdadhatayao.

(If the Gah be Aiwisruthrem, recite as under):-

Ashaunam fravashindm ghenanaimcha vird-vanthwanam yairya-

yaoscha hushitdish, amahecha hutashtahe huraodhahe Verethraghna-
hecha Ahuradhatahe, vanaintyaoscha uparatato.

(If the Gah be Ushahen, recite as under):-

Sraoshahe ashyehe _ ashivatd, verethrajand  fradat-gaéthahe,
Rashnaosh_ razishtahe, Arshtatascha fradat-gaethayao **varedat-
gatthayao.

(8) Dathushod! Ahurahe Mazdao’? raévato? khvarenanguhatd‘*
Ameshanam *’Spentanam‘, (9) Athrd Ahurahe Mazdao puthra, khvare-
nanghO savanghd Mazdadhatahe. Airyanam khvarend Mazdadhatanam,
kavayehecha khvarenanghd Mazdadhatahe, Athrd Ahurahe Mazdao

ava For the translation of the Khshnumans from Hormazd up to Amardad, see Haptan yasht
Large.

avb For the worship of the Creator' Ahura Mazda’, the keeper of the treasures’ and glorious* and
of the Ameshaspand, for (His) praise, for (His) pleasure and for (His) glorification, let the
Zaotar - the officiating priest - proclaim before me Yatha Ahti Vairy6 (i.e. the excellences of the
sacred verse of “Yatha Ahti Vairy6”. (Raspi) (who is) righteous and learned may proclaim (the
excellences of these verses) atha ratush ashatchit hacha”, see Khorshed Nyayesh. Know that the
connection of the words occurring in the genitive case of each Khshnuman may be taken as
shown above.


--- Page 325 ---

SIROZA YASHT 309

puthra. Kavdish Haosravanghahe, vardish Haosravanghahe, Asna-
vantahe garOdish Mazdadhatahe, Chaéchistahe vardish Mazdadhatahe,
kavayehecha khvarenanghd Mazdadhatahe. Athrd Ahurahe Mazdao
puthra. Raévantahe gardish Mazdadhatahe, kavayehecha khvare-
nanghd Mazdadhatahe. Athrd Ahurahe Mazdao puthra. Atarsh spenta
rathaéshtara yazata pouru-khvarenangha yazata_ pouru-baéshaza.
Athrd Ahurahe Mazdao puthra, mat vispa@ibyo, aterebyd, khshathro-
nafedhro Nairy6-sanghahe *“yazatahe.

(10) Apam vanguhinam Mazdadhatanam, Areduy4o apd Anahitayao
ashaonyao, vispanamcha apam Mazdadhatanaim,  vispanamcha
urvaranam *““Mazdadhatanam.

(11) Hvare-khshaétahe ameshahe raévahe *“aurvat aspahe. (12)
Maonghahe gao-chithrahe, géushcha aévo-datayao, géushcha *pouru-
saredhayao. (13) Tishtryehe Stard raévato khvarenanguhatod, Satavaé-
sahe frapahe strahe Mazdadhatahe; staram afsh-chithranam zemas-
chithranam urvar6-chithranam Mazdadhatanam; Vanantd Starod
Mazdadhatahe, ave stard yoi Haptodiringa Mazdadhata khvarenangu-
hanta “*baéshazya. (14) Géush Tashne Géush Urune Dravaspayao
Sirayao Mazdadhatay4o ashaonyao.

(15) Dathushd Ahurahe Mazdao_ raévatd khvarenanguhato
Ameshanam Spentanam. (16) Mithrahe Vouru-gaoyaoitdish hazangro-
gaoshahe baévare-chashmand aokhtd-namand yazatahe, *"Ramand
khvastrahe. (18) “‘Rashnaosh' razishtahe?, Arshtdtascha’ fradat-
gaéthayao‘ varedat-gaéthay4o*, erezukhdhahe’® vachanghd’ yat *!fradat-
gaéthahe’. (20) Amahe hutashtahe, huraodhahe Verethraghnahe

ave For the translation of the Khshnuman of Adar yazata, see Atash Nyayesh.
avd For the translation of the Khshnuman of Avan yazata, see note 1 on Ardvi Sura Nyayesh.

ave i.e. For the worship of the immortal, radiant and swift footed horse Sun, and for his praise,
etc. (See Khorshed Nyayesh).

avf For the translation of the Khshnuman of Mah yazata, see Mah Bokhtar Nyayesh, first note.

avg For the praise, etc., of the radiant and glorious Star Tishtrya, of (the Star named) Satavaesa,
powerful (and) the distributor of (rain) waters (to various places), created by Ahura Mazda, of
the Stars created by Ahura Mazda, containing the seed of water, the seed of the earth and the
seed of the plants (i.e. having the characteristics of increasing and prospering them), of the star
Vanant, created by Ahura Mazda, and of those stars (named) Haptoiringa, glorious and health-
giving, (see Khorshed Nyayesh).

avh For the praise, etc., of the Fashioner of the world, of the soul of the Universe (or of the cre-
ation of the cattle, the soul of the cattle) and of Dravaspa created by Ahura Mazda, powerful and
holy, (see Khorshed Nyayesh para 10).

avi For the translation of the Khshnuman of Meher yazata, see Meher Nyayesh.

avj For the praise, etc., of the just? Rashne yazata', Ashtad yazata*, making the world prosper-
ous’ and causing the world to flourish®, (and) of the truthfully-spoken® word’, making the world
prosperous (see Khorshed Nyayesh).


--- Page 326 ---

310 KHORDEH AVESTA

Ahuradhatahe, vanaintyaoscha *“uparatatd. (21) Ramand khvastrahe,
Vayaosh uparo-kairyehe taradhatd anydish dam4n; aétat te vayo yat te
asti spentd-mainyaom; thwashahe khvadhatahe zravanahe akaranahe
zrvanahe daregh6-khvadhatahe. (22) Vatahe! hudhaonghd’? adharahe’
uparahe‘ fratarahe® paschaithyehe®, nairyayao’ “ham-varetoish®.

(23) Dathushé! Ahurahe Mazdao? raévatd? khvarenanguhatd*
Ameshanam Spentanam’. (24) Razishtayao° chistayao Mazdadhatayao®
ashaonyao’ daénayao” vanghuyao' Mazdayasnoish”. (25) Ashdish™
vanghuyao™ chistdish'> vanghuyao” erethe'’ vanghuy4o'’, rasastato””
vanghuyao” khvarenangh6d”' savangho” Mazdadhatahe*. Parendyao™“
raorathayao”, airyanam” khvarend”’ Mazdadhatanam”, kavayehecha”
khvarenangho*” Mazdadhatahe*!', akhvaretahecha” khvarenangh6d™
Mazdadhatahe*, Zarathushtrahecha® khvarenangho* Mazdadhatahe*’.
(26) Arshtato** fradat-gaéthahe”, gardish*” ushidarenahe*! Mazda-
dhatahe® asha-khvathrahe*.

(23) Of the Creator’ Ahura Mazda’, the keeper of treasures* (and)
glorious* (and) of the *“"“Ameshaspand* (Bountiful Immortals) (24) of the
truthful’ (and) holy’ knowledge’ (i.e. religious education), created by Ahura
Mazda’, the good"! Mazda-Worshipping”” Religion'®, (25) righteousness’* (or
of Ashishvangh) good'® wisdom’, truthfulness'’, good” justice’, glory’!
(and) prosperity”, created by Ahura Mazda’, of Parendi™* of the quick-
moving (or light) chariot, Iranian’ glory’’, the Kayanian” glory*, the
unconsumed* glory*? (and) of the glory*® of (the Prophet) Zarathushtra*,
created by Ahura Mazda’’, (26) of Astad yazata**, making the world prosper-
ous*’, (and) the mountain*’ (called) Ushi-darena*!, created by Ahura Mazda”,
of holy splendour® (or of holy felicity’) (for the worship, etc., of all these let
the Zaotar - the officiating priest - proclaim before me the excellences of the
sacred verses of Yatha Aht Vairyo).*"

(27) Ashn6* berezatd* siirahe*, vahishtahe”’ anghéush* ashaonam”
raochangho” visp6-khvathro*'. (28) Zemd” hudhaongh6d™ yazatahe™;
imao* asao*, imao*” shodithrao* gardish® ushi-darenahe® Mazda-
dhatahe®' asha-khvathrahe® vispaéshamcha® gairinam™ asha-khvath-
ranam® pouru-khvathranam® Mazdadhatanam”; kavayehecha®
khvarenanghd® Mazdadhatahe” akhvaretahecha” khvarenanghd”
Mazdadhatahe”™. (29) Manthrahe” spentahe® ashaon6d” verezyang-
hahe”, datahe’ vidaévahe”, datahe®” Zarathushtrdish*'; dareghayao”

avk For the translation of the Khshnumans of Beheram yazata and Mino Ram, see the translation
of “Jasa Me avanghe Mazda”.

avl For the praise, etc., of the wind' of good creation’, that blows below’, forward? (and) back-
ward? and of Nairya’ ham-vareti’ (i.e. of manly protection) (see Khorshed Nyayesh).

avm For the praise, etc. (see Khorshed Nyayesh).

avn For its comparison, see yasna Ha 1, para 14.


--- Page 327 ---

SIROZA YASHT 311

upayanayao*, daénayao™ vanghuyao* Mazdayasnoish®, zarzdatoish*®’
manthrahe® spentahe® ushi-darethrem”, daénayao”! MazdayasnOish”,
vaédhim® manthrahe™ spentahe”, asnahe”’ khrathw6”’ Mazdadhatahe”,
gaosho-sritahe” khrathwo'” Mazdadhatahe'.

(27) Of the lofty* and majestic*® sky“, of the heaven*’* righteous
(people)”, bright® (and) all-comfortable*', (28) of Zamyat” yazata™ of good
creation™, of these** places*® (and) cities*’, of the mountain® (named)
Ushidarena®, *’°created by Ahura Mazda‘, of all® the mountains™ created by
Ahura Mazda®’, of holy felicity® and full happiness”, of the Kayanian®
Glory® created by Ahura Mazda” (and) the unconsumed”! glory” created by
Him”, (29) the efficacious”, holy” (and) beneficent’? Manthra™, the anti-
demonic” Law’, the Law® of Zarathushtra*', the old custom® of long ages”
and the good** Mazda-worshipping® Religion“, of the devotion*’ to the
prosperity-bringing® manthra®, holding in mind” of the Religion®! of
Mazda-Worship”, knowledge® of the prosperity-bringing®> méanthra™,
innate” wisdom*’ given by Ahura Mazda*’, and wisdom'” acquired through
the ears” (i.e. learnt) given by Ahura Mazda'. (For the praise, etc., of all
these let the Zaotar proclaim before me the excellences of the verses of Yatha
Ahi Vairy6).

(30) Anaghranam? raochangham’ khvadhatanam‘, raokhshnahe®
gard-nmanahe®, misvanahe’ gatvahe® khvadhatahe’, chinvat-peretim”
Mazdadhatam". (31) Berezato’” Ahurahe'’ nafedhro apaim' apascha’®
Mazdadhatayao"”. (32) Haomahe!* ashavazangho”. (33) Dahmayao”
vanghuyao”' afritdish”, ughrai*® damdish* upamanai*. Vispaésham”
yazatanam”’ ashaonam”* mainyavanam” gaéthyanam*”. Ashaunam*!
fravashinam? ughranam® aiwithuranaim™ paoiryd-tkaéshanam*
fravashinam*, nabanazdishtanam*’ fravashinim*®.

Khshnaothra® yasnaicha” vahmaicha*! khshnaothraicha® frasasta-
yaécha*, Yatha Ahi Vairyo“ zaota* fra-me** mrite*’, atha ratush
ashatchit hacha® fra ashava® vidhvao” mraoti*.

(30) For the worship* of the boundless’ natural‘ lights, of the shining®
(heaven) Garothman’, natural? Hamistagan’*, the Chinvat Bridge’® reated by
Ahura Mazda’ (31) the navel'* of waters’ (which is) the *”exalted'? Lord’?
(and) the waters'® created by Ahura Mazda'’, (32) of Haoma'® giving the
strength of righteousness’’, (33) the pious”® and good?! Benediction”, the
powerful”? Dami Upamana (i.e. the Symbol of Wisdom)**”*, (and) of all’* the
holy”® yazatas’’ pertaining to the Spiritual (and) Material world*, (and) of the

powerful (and) triumphant* Fravashis® of the righteous (people)*', the

avo For its comparison see yasna Ha 1, para 14.

avp Or of the yazata Barjo; later on the qualitative epithet (berezat) of Apam Napat (or Apam
Naptar) was used as ““Barjo”. In the same way, the name “‘anaghra raochao” became Aneran later
on; the name “‘Vahishta Ahu” became “Behesht”.


--- Page 328 ---

312 KHORDEH AVESTA

Fravashis of the Poryotkaeshas*, the Fravashis** of the next of the kin*’, for
(their) praise*', propitiation” and glorification®, let the Zaotar* proclaim*’
before me“ “Yatha Ahi Vairyo™” (i.e. the excellences of the sacred verses of
Yatha Ahi Vairyd); let (the (Raspi) who is righteous*® (and) learned*
*“4nroclaim®! atha ratush ashatchit hacha** (the excellences of these verses).

(1) Ahurem Mazdam raévantem khvarenanguhantem yazamaide;
Amesha spenta hukhshathra hudhaonghd yazamaide. (2) Vohu Mano
Ameshem spentem yazamaide; Akhshtim hamvaintim yazamaide,
taradhatem anyaish daman; 4snem khratim Mazdadhatem yazamaide;
gadshosritem khratum Mazdadhatem yazamaide. (3) Ashem Vahishtem
sraéshtem Ameshem  spentem yazamaide; Airyamanem _ ishim
yazamaide; sirem Mazdadhatem yazamaide; saokam vanguhim vouru-
ddithram Mazdadhatam ashaonim yazamaide. (4) Khshathrem Vairim
Ameshem spentem yazamaide; ayokhshustem yazamaide; marezdikem
thrayd-drightm yazamaide. (5) Spentam vanguhim Armaitim
yazamaide; ratam vanguhim vouru-dodithram Mazdadhatam ashaonim
yazamaide. (6) Haurvatatem Ameshem Spentem yazamaide; yairyam
hushitim yazamaide; saredha ashavana ashahe ratavO yazamaide. (7)
Ameretatem Ameshem spentem yazamaide; fshaonim vathwam
yazamaide; aspinacha yevind yazamaide; gaokerenem  siirem
Mazdadhatem yazamaide.

(During the Havan Gah as well as the Second Havan, recite as under):-
Mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitim yazamaide; Rama khvastrem yazamaide.
(During Rapithwan Gah, recite as under):-

Ashem Vahishtem ataremcha Ahurahe Mazd4o puthrem yazamaide.
(During Uzirin Gah, recite as under):-

Berezantem Ahurem khshathrim khshaétem Apam Napatem aurvat-
aspem yazamaide; apemcha Mazdadhatam ashaoniIm yazamaide.

(During Aiwisruthrem Gah, recite as under):-

Ashaunam vanguhish sirao spentao fravashayO yazamaide;
ghendoscha vir0-vathwao yazamaide; yairyamcha hushitim yazamaide;
amemcha hutashtem huraodhem yazamaide; _ verethraghnemcha
Ahuradhatem yazamaide, Vanaintimcha uparatatem yazamaide.

(During Ushahen Gah, recite as under):-

Sraoshem ashim huraodhem  verethrajanem fradat-gaéthem

ashavanem ashahe ratiim yazamaide; Rashnim razishtem yazamaide;
Arshtatemcha fradat-gaétham *“varedat-gaétham yazamaide.

avq For its explanation, see Srosh Baz.

avr For the translation of the Khshnumans from Hormazd up to Amardad, see Haftan yasht


--- Page 329 ---

SIROZA YASHT 313

(8) Dadhvaonghem Ahurem Mazdam_ raévantem_ khvare-
nanguhantem yazamaide, Amesha Spenta hukhshathra hudhaonghd
yazamaide. (9) Atarem Ahurahe Mazdao puthrem yazamaide; khvarend
Mazdadhatem yazamaide, Savo Mazdadhatem yazamaide; Airyanem
khvarend Mazdadhatem yazamaide; ughrem kavaém khvarend Mazda-
dhatem yazamaide; Atarem Ahurahe Mazdao puthrem yazamaide;
kavaém MHaosravanghem yazamaide; Vairim Haosravanghem
yazamaide; Asnavantem gairtm Mazdadhatem yazamaide, Chaéchistem
vairim Mazdadhatem yazamaide; ughrem Kavaém_ khvarend
Mazdadhatem yazamaide, Atarem Ahurahe Mazdao  puthrem
yazamaide. Atarsh Spenta rathaéshtara yazamaide, yazata pouru-
khvarenangha yazamaide; yazata pouru-baéshaza yazamaide; Atarem
Ahurahe Mazdao puthrem yazamaide; vispe Atard yazamaide.
Khshathrem nafedhrem Nairyosanghem yazatem yazamaide.

(10) Apo vanguhish Mazdadhatao ashaonish yazamaide. Aredvim
Siram Anahitam ashaonim yazamaide; vispao Aapd Mazdadhatao
ashaonish yazamaide, vispao urvarao Mazdadhatao  ashaonish
yazamaide. (11) Hvarekhshaétem ameshem raém_ aurvat-aspem
yazamaide. (12) Maonghem gaochithrem yazamaide, gaom aévo-datahe
urund fravashim yazamaide, gaom pouru-saredhahe urund fravashim
yazamaide. (13) Tishtrim Starem raévantem khvarenanguhantem
yazamaide; satavaésem frapem sirem Mazdadhatem yazamaide; vispe
staro afshchithra yazamaide, vispe stard zemaschithra yazamaide, vispe
stard urvaro-chithra yazamaide. Vanantem Staérem Mazdadhatem
yazamaide, ave stréush yazamaide, yoi hapta Haptodiringa Mazdadhata
khvarenanguhanta baéshazya, paitishtatée yathwam pairikanamcha.
(14) Géush hudhaonghd urvanem yazamaide, Dravaspam siram
Mazdadhatam ashaonim yazamaide.

(15) Dadhvaonghem Ahurem Mazdam raévantem khvarenangu-
hantem yazamaide; Amesha Spenta hukhshathra hudhaonghd
yazamaide. (16) Mithrem Vouru-gaoyaoitim hazangra-gaoshem
baévare-chashmanem aokhtd-nadmanem yazatem yazamaide; Rama
Khvastrem yazamaide. ““(18) Rashnim_ razishtem yazamaide,
Arshtatemcha fradat-gaétham varedat-gaétham yazamaide. (20) Amem
hutashtem huraodhem yazamaide. Verethraghnem Ahuradhatem
yazamaide; Vanaintimcha uparatatem yazamaide. (21) Rama khvastrem
yazamaide, vatm ashavanem yazamaide, vaém_ uparod-kairim
yazamaide, taradhatem anydaish daman, aétat te vayO yazamaide, yat te
asti spentd-mainyaom. Thwashem khvadhatem yazamaide, zrvanem

Large.

avs The Khshnumans of Roz 17 Srosh and of Roz 19 Farvardin are not recited. Refer to the ex-
planation given at the beginning of this yasht.


--- Page 330 ---

314 KHORDEH AVESTA

akaranem yazamaide, zrvanem dareghd-khvadhatem yazamaide. (22)
Vatem spentem hudhaonghem yazamaide, adharem yazamaide, uparem
yazamaide, fratarem yazamaide, paschaithim yazamaide; nairyam
hamvaretim yazamaide.

(23) Dadhvaonghem Ahurem Mazdam raévantem khvarenangu-
hantem yazamaide; Amesha Spenta hukhshathra hudhdonghd
yazamaide. (24) Razishtam chistam Mazdadhatam ashonim yazamaide;
daénam vanguhim Mazdayasnim yazamaide. (25) Ashim Vanguhim
yazamaide, khshOdithnim berezaitim amavaitim huraodham khvaparam;
khvarend Mazdadhatem yazamaide, savd Mazdadhatem yazamaide,
Parendim raorathim yazamaide; Airyanem khvarend Mazdadhatem
yazamaide. Ughrem kavaém khvarend Mazdadhatem yazamaide;
ughrem akhvaretem khvarend Mazdadhatem yazamaide;
Zarthushtrahe khvarend Mazdadhatem yazamaide. (26) Arshtatem
fradat gaéthem yazamaide, gairtm ushidarenem Mazdadhatem asha-
khvathrem yazatem yazamaide.

(27) Asmanem khvanvantem yazamaide, vahishtem ahim ashaonam
yazamaide, raochanghem visp0-khvathrem. (28) Zam hudhaonghem
yazatem yazamaide, im4o asao im4o shoithrao yazamaide; gairtm Ushi-
daranem Mazdadhatem asha-khvathrem yazatem yazamaide; vispao
garayO asha-khvathrao pouru-khvathrao Mazdadhata ashavana ashahe
ratavd yazamaide; ughrem kavaém khvarend Mazdadhatem yazamaide,
ughrem akhvaretem khvarend Mazdadhatem yazamaide. (29)
Manthrem spentem ash-khvarenanghem yazamaide, datem viddyam
yazamaide, datem Zarathushtri yazamaide; dareghaim upayanam
yazamaide, daénam vanguhim Mazdayasnim yazamaide; zarazdaitim
manthrem spentem yazamaide, ushi-darethrem daénam Mazdayasnim
yazamaide, vaédhim manthrem spentem yazamaide, 4snem khratim
Mazdadhatem yazamaide, gaoshd-sritem khratim Mazdadhatem
yazamaide.

(30) Anaghra raochao khvadhatao yazamaide, raokhshnem garo-
nmanem yazamaide, misvanem gatim khvadhatem yazamaide,
Chinvat-peretim Mazdadhatam yazamaide. (31) Berezantem Ahurem
khshathrim khshaétem Apam Napatem aurvat-aspem yazamaide,
apemcha Mazdadhatéam ashaonim yazamaide. (32) Haomem zairim
berezantem yazamaide. Haomem frashmim fradat-gaéthem yazamaide,
Haomem diraoshem yazamaide.

(33) Dahmam vanguhim 4fritim yazamaide, ughrem takhmem
damdish upamanem yazatem yazamaide; vispemcha ashavanem
mainyaom yazatem yazamaide, vispemcha ashavanem gaéthim yazatem
yazamaide.


--- Page 331 ---

SIROZA YASHT 315

(1) *“Ashaunaéam vanguhish siirao spentéo fravavashayo staomi
zbayemi ufyemi. Yazamaide nmanyéao visyao zantumao dakhyumaéo
Zarathushtrotemao. (2) Vispanamcha aongham paoiryanam
fravashinam idha yazamaide fravashim avam yam Ahurahe Mazdao,
mazishtamcha vahishtamcha,_ sraéshtamcha, khraozdishtamcha
khrathwishtamcha hukereptamamcha, ashat apandtemamcha.

(3) Ashaunam vanguhish siirao spentao fravashay0 yazamaide; yao
Ameshanam Spentanim, khshaétanam verezi-dodithranam, berezatam
aiwyamanam takhmanam 4hiiryanam, yoi aithyejanghd ashavano. (4)
Paoiryanam tkaéshanam paoiryanam sasnod-gusham, idha ashaonam
ashaonindmcha ahimcha daenamcha_ baodhascha’_ urvanemcha
fravashimcha yazamaide, ydi ashai vaonare, Géush hudhaonghd
urvanem yazamaide.

(5) YOi ashai vaonare. Gayehe marethnd ashaond fravashim
yazamaide. Zarathushtrahe Spitamahe idha ashaond  ashimcha
fravashimcha yazamaide. Kavdish Vishtaspahe ashaond fravashim
yazamaide. Isat vastrahe Zarathushtrdish ashaond  fravashim
yazamaide. (6) Nabanazdishtanam idha ashaonam ashaoninamcha
ahimcha daenamcha’ baodhascha’ urvanemcha _ fravashimcha
yazamaide, yoi ashai vaonare; mat vispabyd ashaonibyd fravashibyd,
yao iririthusham ashaondm, yaoscha jvantam ashaonam, yaoscha
naram azatanam frashd-charethram Saoshyantam.

(7) Idha iristandm urvand yazamaide, yao ashaondm fravashayd.
Vispanam ahmya =nmdane- nabanazdishtanam para-iristanam
aéthrapaitinam aéthryanadm naram  nairindm idha  ashaonam
ashaoninadm fravashayO yazamaide. (8) Vispanam aéthrapaitinam
ashaonam fravashayO yazamaide. Vispanim aéthryanaim ashaonam
fravashayO yazamaide. Vispanadm naram  ashaondm _fravashyd
yazamaide. Vispanam nairinam ashaoninam fravashayd yazamaide.

(9) Vispanaim aperenayukanam dahmod-keretanaim ashaonaim
fravashayO yazamaide. Adakhyunamcha ashaonam _ fravashayo
yazamaide. Uzdakhyunamcha ashaonam fravashayd yazamaide. (10)
Naramcha ashaonam fravashayOd yazamaide. Nairinamcha ashaoninam
fravashayO yazamaide. Vispao ashaunam vanguhish sirado spentao
fravashayO yazamaide, yao hacha gayat marethnat 4-saoshyantat
verethraghnat.

Vispao fravashayO ashaunaim yazamaide; ashaundm vanguhish
siirao spentao fravashayo yazamaide. Vispe ashavano yazata yazamaide.

(During Havan Gah or during the Second Havan, recite as under):-

avt For the translation of the Karda of Saturn, see the Karda to be recited in memory of the de-
parted ones, given after the end of Siroza yasht.


--- Page 332 ---

316 KHORDEH AVESTA
Havanim paiti ratim, savanghaém Visimcha paiti ratim.
(During Rapithwan Gah, recite as under):-
Rapithwinem paiti ratim, fradat-fshaum zantumemcha paiti ratim.
(During Uzirin Gah, recite as under):-
Uzyeirinem paiti ratim, fradat-virem dahyumemcha paiti ratum.
(During Aiwisruthrem Gah, recite as under):-
Aiwisrithremem aibigaim paiti ratim, fradat-vispam-hujyaitim
Zarathushtrdtememcha paiti ratim.
(During Ushahen Gah, recite as under):-
Ushahinem paiti ratim, Berezim nmanimcha paiti ratim.
Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,

Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(Recite in baz): Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (Recite aloud) Yatha Aht
Vairyii 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha 4frinami, (1) Ahurahe
Mazdao raévatd khvarenanguhaté Ameshanim Spentanam. (2)
Vanghave Mananghe 4khshtdish ham-vaintyao, taradhatd anyaish
daman, asnahe khrathwo Mazdadhatahe, gaosho-sritahe khrathwd
Mazdadhatahe. (3) Ashahe Vahishtahe sraéshtahe, Airyamano ishyehe
sirahe Mazdadhatahe, saokayao vanghuyao vouru-ddithraydo
Mazdadhatayao ashaonyao. (4) Khshathrahe Vairyehe aydkhshustahe
marezdikai thrayodrigaove. (5) Spentayao vanghuyao Armatdish
ratayao vanghuyao vouru-doithrayao Mazdadhatayao ashaonyao. (6)
Haurvatatd rathwo yairyayao hushitoish, saredhaéibyo ashahe ratubyd.
(7) Ameretatd rathwd fshaonibya vathwabya, aspinibya yaonibya,
gaokerenahe sirahe Mazdadhatahe.

(During Havan Gah as well as during the second Havan, recite as
under):-

Mithrahe vouru-gaoyaoitdish, Ramanascha Khvastrahe.
(During Rapithwan Gah, recite as under):-

Ashahe Vahishtahe athrascha Ahurahe Mazdao.

(During Uzirin Gah, recite as under):-

Berzatod Ahurahe nafedhro 4pam apascha Mazdadhatayao.


--- Page 333 ---

SIROZA YASHT 317

(During Aiwisruthrem Gah, recite as under):-

Ashaunam fravashinam ghenanamcha vird-vanthwanam yairya-
yaoscha hashitdish, amahecha hutashtahe huraodhahe, Verethragh-
nahecha Ahuradhatahe, Vanaintydoscha uparatato.

(During Ushahen Gah, recite as under):-

Sraoshahe ashyehe ashivatd, verethrajand fradat gaéthahe,
Rashnaosh_ razishtahe, Arshtatascha fradat gatthayao  varedat-
gatthayao.

(8) DathushO Ahurahe Mazdao_ raevatd khvarenanguhato
Ameshanam Spentanam. (9) Athrd Ahurahe Mazdao puthra, khvare-
nanghO savanghd Mazdadhatahe, Airyanam khvarend Mazdadhatanam,
kavayehecha khvarenanghd Mazdadhatahe, Athrd Ahurahe Mazdao
puthra. Kavdish Haosravanghahe, Vardish Haosravanghahe,
Asnavantahe gardish Mazdadhatahe, Chaéchistahe vardish Mazda-
dhatahe, Kavayehecha khvarenanghd Mazdadhatahe. Athrd Ahurahe
Mazdao puthra. Ra€évantahe gardish Mazdadhatahe, Kavayehecha
khvarenanghd Mazdadhatahe, Athrd Ahurahe Mazdao puthra. Atarsh
spenta rathaéshtara, yazata pouru-khvarenangha yazata_ pouru-
baéshaza. Athrd Ahurahe Mazdao puthra, mat vispaéibyd aterebyo,
khshathrod-nafedhro Nairyosanghahe yazatahe.

(10) Apam vanguhinam Mazdadhatanam, Areduy4o apo Anahitayao
ashaonyao, vispanamcha apam Mazdadhatanam vispanamcha urvara-
nam Mazdadhatanam. (11) Hvare khshaétahe ameshahe raévahe
aurvat-aspahe. (12) Maonghahe gaochithrahe, géushcha aévo-datayao,
géushcha pouru-saredhayao. (13) Tishtryehe staro raévatd khvare-
nanguhato, satavaésahe frapahe sirahe Mazdadhatahe; staram afsh-
chithranam zemas-chithranam urvaro-chithranam Mazdadhatanam;
Vanantd staro Mazdadhatahe, ave stard yoi Haptoiringa Mazdadhata
khvarenanguhanta baéshazya. (14) Géush tashne géush urune
Dravaspay4o sirayao Mazdadhatay4ao ashaonyao.

(15) Dathushd Ahurahe Mazdao_ raévat0d khvarenanguhatd
Ameshanam Spentanam. (16) Mithrahe vouru-gaoyaoitodish hazangr6-
gaoshahe baévare-chashmand aokhtd namand yazatahe, Ramanod
khvastrahe. (718) Rashnaosh razishtahe, Arshtatascha  fradat-
gatthayao varedat-gaéthayao, erezukhdhahe vachanghd yat fradat-
gaéthahe. (20) Amahe_ hutashtahe, huraodhahe Verethraghnahe
Ahuradhatahe, Vanaintyaoscha uparatatd. (21) Ramanod khvastrahe,
vayaosh uparo-kairyehe taradhato anyaish daman; aétat te vayo yat te
asti spentd-mainyaom; thwashahe khvadhatahe zrvanahe akara-
nahe zrvanahe dareg0d-khvadhatahe. (22) Vatahe hudhaonghd

avu Refer to the explanation given in the beginning of this yasht.


--- Page 334 ---

318 KHORDEH AVESTA

adharahe uparahe fratarahe paschaithyehe, nairyayad hamvare-
toish.

(23) Dathushod Ahurahe Mazdfo raévatd khvarenanguhatd
Ameshanam Spentanam. (24) Razishtayao Chistayo Mazda-
dhatayao ashaonyaéo daenayao vanghuyao MazdayasndOish. (25)
Ashdish vanghuyao, chistdish vanghuydo, erethe vanghuyao,
rasastato vanghuy4o, khvarenanghd savanghd Mazdadhatahe.
Parendyao raorathayao, Airyanam khvarend Mazdadhatanam,
Kavayehecha khvarenanghd Mazdadhatahe, akhvaretahecha
khvarenanghd Mazdadhatahe, Zarathustrahecha khvarenanghd
Mazdadhatahe. (26) Arshtato fradat-gaéthahe, gardish ushi-
darenahe Mazdadhatahe asha-khvathrahe.

(27) Ashn6 berezato strahe vahishtahe anghéush ashaonam
raochanghd vispo-kavathroé. (28) Zemd hudhaonghd yazatahe;
im4o asao, im4o shdithrao, gardish ushi-darenahe Mazdadhatahe
asha-khvathrahe vispaeshamcha gairinadm asha-khvathranam
pouru-khvathranam Mazdadhatanaim; kavayehecha_ khvare-
nanghd Mazdadhatahe, akhvaretahecha khvarenanghd Mazda-
dhatahe.

Manthrahe spentahe ashaonOd verezyanghahe, datahe vidaévahe,
datahe Zarathushtroish; dareghayao upayanayao, daénayao vanghuyao
Mazdayasnoish, zarazdato0ish manthrahe spentahe ushi-darethrem,
daénayao Mazdayasnodish, vaédhim manthrahe spentahe, Asnahe
khrathwo Mazdadhatahe, gaoshd-sriitahe khrathwo Mazdadhatahe.

Anaghranaim raochanghim khvadhatanam, raokhshnahe gard-
nmanahe, misvanahe gatvahe khvadhatahe, chinvat-peretiam Mazda-
dhatam.

(31) Berezatd Ahurahe nafedhrd apim apascha Mazdadhatayao. (32)
Haomahe ashavazanghd. (33) Dahmay4o vanghuydo 4fritoish, ughrai
damdish upamanai. Vispaésham yazatandm ashaonam mainyavanam
gatéthyanam. Ashaunam fravashinam ughranam aiwithiranam paoiryo-
tkaéshanam fravashinam, nabanazdishtanam *“fravashinam. Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ahmiai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
avv Know that the Khshnumans of the yazatas given here are similar to the Khshnumans given

at the beginning of Siroza yasht, beginning with fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish; there is
no difference at all. Hence for the translation, refer to these pages.


--- Page 335 ---

SIROZA YASHT 319

Mozd.

Roz nek nam, roz pak nam, roz mubarak (falan) mahe mubarak
(falan), gahe (falan) namaz dadare gehan daman. Khshnaothra Ahurahe
Mazdao, tardidite angrahe mainyéush. Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohi 1.

Gorje Khoreh awazayad Sirozi Ameshaspand  vispaésha
Ardafarvash berasad amavand pirozgar amavandth pirozgari. Dad din
beh Mazdayasnan, 4gahi ravai goafarangani bad hafte keshvar zamin;
aediin bad. Man Ano avayad shudan, man ano 4vayad shudan, man 4no
avayad shudan. Ashaone Ashem Vohi 1.

(Recite facing South:) Dadare gehan dine Mazdayasni dade
Zarathushti. Nemase-te ashaum sévishte Aredvi Sira Anahite ashaone.
Ashem Vohi 1.

Nemo urvaire vanguhi Mazdadhate ashaone Ashem Vohi 1. Ahurem
Mazdam raévantem khvarenanguhantem yazamaide. Amesha Spenta
hukhshathra hudhadonghd yazamaide. Ashaunaim vanguhish sirao
spentao fravashayO yazamaide. Ashem Vohi 1. Sirozé Ameshaspand
vispaésha Ardafarvash berasad. Ashem Vohi 1.

KARDA TO BE RECITED IN MEMORY OF THE
DEPARTED ONES

Pa name yazdin Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh
awazayad; Ardafravash *“berasad. Az hama gunah patet pashemanum;
az harvastin dushmata duzhikhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid,
oem goft, oem kard, oem jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah
manashni gavashni kunashni, tani ravani get! mmodani, okhe avakhsh
pasheman pa sé gavashni pa patet hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao,
tardidite angrahe mainyéush; MHaithyavarshtam hyat  vasna
ferashotemem. Staomi ashem; Ashem Vohii 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévé Ahura-tkaésh6o (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Ahurahe Mazdao
raévatO khvarenanguhatd, Ameshanaim Spentanim, ashaonam

avw i.e. may the Holy Fravashis come (to this recital)! Know that the initial and the final
khshnuman of this Kardah to be recited in memory of the departed ones, is similar to that of the
Afrinagan Ardafravash.


--- Page 336 ---

320 KHORDEH AVESTA

fravashinam ughranam aiwithuranam paoiry0-tkaéshanam
fravashinam, nabanazdishtanam fravashinam, khshnaothra yasnaicha
vahmaicha khshnaothrdaicha frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota
fra-me mrite, atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti.
Ahurem Mazdam_ raévantem’ khavarenanghuhantem  yazamaide;
Amesha Spenta hukhshathra hudhaonghd yazamaide.

(1) Ashaunim!' vanguhish? surao*> spentao* fravashayd° staomi‘
zbayemi’ ufyemi®. Yazamaide’ nmanyao'’ visyao' zantumao”
dakhyumao'’ Zarathushtroétemao™. (2) Vispanamcha’ Aaongham'®
paoiryanam” fravashinam'’ idha’” yazamaide”” fravashim?! avam”
yam” Ahurahe* Mazdao**, mazishtamcha* vahishtamcha”’ sraésh-
tamcha”* khraozdishtamcha” khrathwishtamcha® hukereptemamcha*,
ashat® apandtemamcha™®.

(1) I praise’, remember’ (or invoke) the good’, heroic’? (and) the
beneficent* Fravashis’ of the righteous (people)! (and) *“I sing their glory.
We worship? (those Fravashis) belonging to the house"®, to the street!’, to the
town”, belonging to the province’* (and) the highest priests'*. (2) *”’First!”
among all!* these'® Fravashis'® we worship”’ here’? that” Fravashi”! of (the
Creator) Ahura Mazda***> which” is of high degree or excellence, fairest”,
*7courage-giving”’, wisest*’, practising good deeds of the highest degree?!
and supreme*? in holiness* (i.e. best).

(3) Ashaunam** vanguhish* siirao*’ spentao*’ fravashayo**
yazamaide®; yao*” Ameshanam*! Spentanam”, khshaétanam* verezi-
doithranam“, berezatam* aiwyamanam“, takhmanam” ahiiryanam*,
yoi” aithyajangho ashavano*'. (4) Paoiryanam® tkaéshanam*,
paoiryanam™ sasno-gisham®, idha®% ashaonam*’ ashaoninamcha®
ahimcha® daénamcha” baodhascha" urvanemcha® fravashimcha®
yazamaide™, yoi® ashai® vaonare”’. Géush® hudhaonghd® urvanem”
yazamaide”.

(3) We worship*® the good*’, heroic*® (and) beneficent*’ Fravashis of the
righteous (people)**. We worship “the fravashis“’ of the Holy Immortals*!”,

43 awe

>the rulers*, “effective glance“, exalted**, coming for help**, the mighty*”,

avx Based on the Pahlavi version “I make my own” (Spiegel and Darmesteter); i.e. I make them
pleased or to love me (Darmesteter). “I offer myself to” (Harlez). If the root vap of “ufvemi” be
compared with Sanskrit nis vap, its meaning then can be “I dedicate something as gift”.

avy Or if it is taken as an adjective of “Fravashinam”, its meaning may be among the most an-
cient or the “first Fravashis”.

avz Most firm-solid (Mills and Darmesteter); strongest (Spiegel).
awa The word ydo applies to fravashayo. The original meaning of ydo is “who”.
awb Devoted, anxious (Mills); eager (for good works) (Darmesteter).

awe Good-eyed, i.e. by whose glance good effect can be produced; opposite of evil-eye
(Darmesteter).


--- Page 337 ---

KARDA TO BE RECITED IN MEMORY OF THE DEPARTED ONES 321

acting according to the laws of Ahura Mazda**, who” (are) immortal* (and)
righteous*'. (4) Here** we worship™ the life*’ conscience™, intelligence’,
soul” and fravashi® of righteous’? (men) and (women) of the
“4Poryotkaeshas*? (and) of the first** “acceptors of the religion®, who®
“fought with success” for righteousness®. We worship” the soul” of the

““8bull® of good creation® (i.e. of Gavyodad).

(5) Yoi? ashai’ vaonare™’. Gayehe*® Marethno” ashaond”
fravashim”™ yazamaide”. Zarathushtrahe® Spitamahe®*! idha® ashaon6o®™
ashimcha™ fravashimcha® yazamaide*®. Kavodish®’ Vishtaspahe®
ashaon6d® fravashim” yazamaide”'. Isat-vastrahe” Zarathushtrdish™
ashaono™ fravashim®> yazamaide”®. (6) Nabanazdishtanam” idha”®
ashaonam” ashaoninamcha'’ ahimcha' daénamcha’ baodhascha*
urvanemcha‘* fravashimcha*® yazamaide’, yoi’ ashai® vaonare’; mat’?
vispabyd" ashaonibyé” fravashibyd", yao" iririthusham'’, ashaonam'*
yaoscha”’ jvantam'® ashaonam”, yaoscha” naram?! azatanam” frasho-
charethram” saoshyantam”™.

(5) We worship” the Fravashi” of the righteous” *“*Gayomard’”*”°. We
worship here’ the holiness* of the Holy® Spitaman*' Zarathushtra®’ and
(his) “Fravashi*. We worship” the Fravashi® of the righteous®? Kava*’
Vishtaspa*’. We worship” the Fravashi®® of the righteous™ Isat-vastra” (the
eldest son) of (the Prophet) Zarathushtra”’, who” *“‘fought with triumph” for
righteousness”. (6) Here*® we worship® the life’, conscience’, intelligence’,
soul’ and the fravashi® of the righteous” (men) and (women) amongst the
~kNabanazdishtas” who’ fought with triumph? for righteousness’, along
with'°all" holy’? fravashis'* of the righteous (men)'* (who are) departed’*, of

awd i.e. Mazda-worshippers of the age prior to the Prophet Holy Zarathushtra.

awe Original meaning is “meditators upon religious education”, listeners to the commandments
of the religion. Sasna = Sanskrit shdsan = religious education, religious book.

awf Vaonare - past perfect third person singular parasmaipada of root van = to win.

awg It’s another form of géush aévd-dataydo (see Mah Bokhtar Nyayesh) in the passage of
“fravarane Mazdayasno”.

awh Gayomard was the First and foremost person of the Iranian race. Its original meaning is
“mortal life’, “life subject to destruction”.

awi Professor Darmesteter has not translated this sentence - Zarathushtrahe Spitamahe idha
ashaono ashimcha fravashimcha yazamaide.

awj Reverend Mills has not translated yoi ashdi vaonare.

awk i.e. the acceptors of the religion of the Prophet Zarathushtra, the persons born in the Reli-
gion of Zarathushtra; its analogy is Paoiry6-tkaesha, i.e. those of the ancient faith. The original
meaning of “‘nabanazdishta” is “nearest the navel”; from this it means closely connected, “next
of kin”.


--- Page 338 ---

322 KHORDEH AVESTA

awl. 24

the righteous'® living (men)!’ (and) of the “progressive? *“"Saoshyants

who will be born hereafter”! ”’.

(7) Idha” iristanam”’ urvan6’ yazamaide”* yao” ashaonam” fravash-
ayo*'. Vispanim®” ahmya®* nmane™“ nabanazdishtanam* para-irista-
nam* aéthrapaitinam’”’ aéthryanam®* naram® nairinam*” idha*' asho-
nam® ashaoninam® fravashayo“ yazamaide*. (8) Vispanam“ aéthra-
paitinam®”’ ashaonam*® fravashayo” yazamaide™, vispanam*! aéthrya-
nam ashaonam*® fravashayo“ yazamaide®. Vispanam®™ naram*’ asha-
onam*® fravashayo® yazamaide®. Vispanam® nairinam® ashaoninam®
fravashayo™ yazamaide®.

(7) We worship”® here” these souls’’ of the departed ones*® who” belong
to the Fravashis*’ of the holy *“"ones*®. Here*! in this*? house** we worship*
those fravashis“ of the righteous” (men) and (women) amongst all*” the
departed*®, next of kin**, *“°teachers*’, disciples**, men* or women*’. (8)
““PWe worship the fravashis” of righteous (teachers)*® amongst all*®
teachers*’. We worship*® the fravashis™ of righteous (disciples) amongst
all®' disciples”. We worship® the fravashis* of righteous (men)** amongst
all®° men*’. We worship® the fravashis™ of righteous (women) amongst all®!
women”.

(9) Vispanam® aperenayukanam®” dahm6-keretanam® ashaonam”
fravashayo” yazamaide”. Adakhyunamcha” ashaonam® fravashayo”
yazamaide’. Uz-dakhyunamcha” ashaonam” fravashay6” yazamaide”.
(10) Naramcha* ashaonam*' fravashayo” yazamaide®. Nairinamcha*
ashaoninam® _fravashayd** yazamaide’’. Vispao* ashaunam”®
vanguhish” siirao®! spentao” fravashayo® yazamaide™, yao” hacha”
gayat”’ marethnat” 4” saoshyantat'™ verethraghnat'.

(9) We worship” the fravashis” of all holy *“‘young ones‘’, “doing
pious deeds. We worship” the fravashis™ of the righteous (people) among
those (who) inhabited in this land”, and outside the land (i.e. in other

awl Or the promoters (of the world), performers of resurrection, the renovators of the world
(Professor Harlez, Mills and Darmesteter).

awm For the explanation of “Saoshyants”, see Hom yasht Large, note on paragraph 2.

awn Here we worship the souls of the dead and the Fravashis of the righteous people (Professor
Harlez). We worship the souls of the dead which are the fravashis of the righteous (Dr. Spiegel
and Reverend Mills). We worship the souls of the dead, the Fravashis of the righteous ones (Pro-
fessor Darmesteter).

awo Herbad, ervad, i.e. learned or well-versed in the education of the Zoroastrian religion, mas-
ter of knowledge, teacher of the knowledge of religion, religious teacher.

awp Or alternately:- We worship the fravashis of all righteous teachers. The following sentences
may also be translated the same way.

awq Or of children, of infants - minor ones; its antonym is perenayu = of full age.

awr Begotten of pious parents (Darmesteter).


--- Page 339 ---

KARDA TO BE RECITED IN MEMORY OF THE DEPARTED ONES 323

countries). (10) *““We worship® the fravashis® of righteous*! men*’, and
women™. We worship™ all** the excellent’, heroic®!, (and) beneficent”
fravashis”’ of the righteous (people)®” which” (are) from Gayomard®’*® up
to” the victorious’ Saoshyant'™.

(To recite in baz): ™‘Humata hikhta hvarshta; humanashni,
hugavashni, hukunashni, in khshnuman ardafravash bé-rasad, nirang
pirozgar bad; khoreh beh dine Mazdayasnan rava bad andar hafte
keshvar. Nam cheshti adar andar kam bad; hasta sheherastan andar
(the name of the country in which this Karda is recited should be named)
sheherestan pori firozi shadi o ramashni, ravan khoreh khojasteh
avazin bad avazuntar bad khoreh khojasteh bad; in khshnuman
Ardafravash be-rasad, kera gah roz shehertari khesh yazashne karde
hom, darun yashte hom, myazda hamiraenem yo kardeha pa ganje
Dadar Ahura Mazda rayOmand khorehmand Ameshaspandan be-rasad.
Aoj zor niru tagi amavandi pirozgarl in khshnuman Ardafravash
berasad. Az ham padiraftar bad. Emara panaht kerdar niki andakhtar,
anai petyar dir avazdashtar, ayafta khah bad. Kera digar myazd hazar
mard myazd shayam sakht emara kam-ranjtar asantar aini kard yak az
ma hazar padiraftar bad. Nam cheshti anusheh ravan ravani (the name
of the person in whose memory this karda is recited should be taken
here) aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravanti.

Zartosht Spitaman asho farohar aedar yad bad anusheh ravan
ravani. Gushtaspa Shah Lohoraspa Shah aedar yad bad anusheh ravan
ravani. Jamaspa Habub aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Ardae
Viraf Ardafravash aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Adarbad
Maraspand aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Mubed Shapur
Mubed Sheheriar aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravanit. Mubed
Hormazdiar Ervad Ramyar aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani.
Mubed Neryosang Dhaval aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Hama
fravash ashoan aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Nam cheshti
anusheh ravan ravani (the name of the person in whose memory this Karda
is recited should be taken here) Hama fravash ashoan aedar yad bad;
farmaeshne (the name of the person who had ordered this recitation of the
Kardah should be taken) Mazdayasni berasad.

HamAafravash ashoan yo kardeha cheharum dehum siroz sal roz, az
Gayomard anda Soshyos aedar yad bad. Hastan biidan bedan zadan
azadan, adehi uzdehi, dahme nar narik avarnae purnae, har ke avar in
zamin peri behedini gudaran shud ast, hamafravash ashoan, yo kardeha

aws Its significance is, that we remember with reverence, i.e. worship the Fravashis of righteous
persons inhabited in the Iranian city as well as in countries outside Iran.

awt Know that the portion from here up to the rubric “Recite aloud”, being in Pazend, should be
recited in baz - in low tone. For its explanation, see Khorshed Nyayesh para. 16, end.


--- Page 340 ---

324 KHORDEH AVESTA

az Gayomard anda Soshyos aedar yad bad. Ke inm4n vis zand deh rusta
guzasteh and, hama fravash ashoan yo kardeha az Gayomard anda
Soshyos aedar yad bad. Ashoan fravash, chiran fravash, avar vizan
fravash, pirozgaran fravash, poryddakeshan fravash, nabanazdeshtan
fravash, fravashayd hamayd kardeha az Gayomard and4 Soshyos aedar
yad bad. Ravane pedaran madaran jadagan, nyagan farzandan
paevandan parastaran nabanazdeshtan, fravash ashoan, yO kardeha az
Gayomard anda Soshyos aedar yad bad. Hama athornan, hama
rathéshtaran, hama vastryOshan, hamaé hutdkhshan, hama fravash
ashoan, hama yo kardeha az Gayomard and§4 Soshyos aedar yad bad;
hama fravash ashoan hafte keshvar zamin, arzahe savahe, fradadafsh,
vidadafsh, vourubarasht, vouru-zaresht, khanaras bami, kangdez
ashoan varjam kardan ganjamathra, hama fravash ashoan hama yo
kardeha az Gayomard anda Soshyos aedar yad bad. Gorje khoreh
awazayad in khshnuman Ardafravash berasad. Nam cheshti naosheh
ravan ravani (the name of the person in whose memory this kardah is
recited should be taken here) aedar yad bad anosheh ravan ravani; hama
fravash ashoan aedar yad bad; farmaeshne (the name of the person who
had ordered this recitation of the Kardah should be taken) Mazdayasni
berasad. Hamkerfeh hama vehane hafte keshvar zamin berasad. Az
hama gunah patet pashemanum pa patet hom.

(Recite aloud): Vispao fravashayO ashaunam yazamaide; Ashaunam
vanguhish sirao spentao fravashay0d yazamaide. Vispe ashavano yazata
yazamaide.

(One should recite in Havan Gah or in the Second Havan as under):-
Havanim paiti ratium, SAavanghaém visimcha paiti ratim.

(If the Gah be Rapithwan, recite as under):-

Rapithwinem paiti ratim, fradat-fshaum zantumemcha paiti ratim.
(If the Gah be Uzirin, recite as under):-

Uzyeirinem paiti ratim, fradat-virem dakhyumemcha paiti ratim.
(If the Gah be Aiwisruthrem, recite as under):-

Aiwisrithremem aibigaim paiti ratim, fradat-vispam hujyaitim
Zarathushtrdtememcha paiti ratim.

(If the Gah be Ushahen, recite as under):-
Ushahinem paiti ratim, berejim nmanimcha paiti ratim.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz): Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum, mardum


--- Page 341 ---

KARDA TO BE RECITED IN MEMORY OF THE DEPARTED ONES 325

sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi astavani neki rasanad aediin bad. (To recite aloud) Yatha
Ahi Vairyo 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha 4Afrinadmi, Ahurahe
Mazdao raévato khvarenanguhatd Ameshanaim Spentanam, ashaonam
fravashinam ughranam aiwithiranam, paoiryd-tkaéshanam fravashi-
nam, nabanazdishtanam *“fravashinam. Ashem Vohi 1.

Ahmai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozd.

A BRIEF AND INFORMATIVE SYNOPSIS OF THE
ABOVE MENTIONED PAZEND PORTION TO BE
RECITED IN BAZ — LOW TONE

May this khshnuman (i.e. the ceremonial propitiation) performed with
my good thought, good word and good deed reach the Holy Fravashis! (i.e.
may this work of invoking the Holy Fravashis be completed properly!) May
the glory of the good Mazda-worshipping Religion be current in all the seven
regions of the earth! May the victory and happiness attain to the people of
this city! And may their souls be pleased! May the pleasure of this ceremony
reach the Holy Fravashis! and may it be approved in presence of the Creator
Ahura Mazda! May we acquire happiness and peace of life!

May the soul of *’so and so departed person be remembered here! May
the Holy Fravashi of Zarathushtra Spitaman and his revered soul be
remembered here! May the revered soul of Isat vastra, the son of the Prophet
Zarathushtra be remembered here! May the revered soul of King Gustaspa,
the son of King Lohraspa be remembered here! May the revered souls of all
these, viz. Jamaspa Habub, Ardaeviraf of Holy Fravashi, Adarbad
Marespand, Mobed Shapur Mobed Sheheriar, Mobed Hormazdiar, Ervad
Ramyar, Mobed Neryosang Dhaval, be remembered here! May the soul of so
and so departed person be remembered here! May all the Holy Fravashis be
remembered here! May the share of meritorious deeds reach so and so, who
orders the performance of this ceremony! May the souls of the mother,
father, ancestors, children, relatives, etc., be remembered here! May the
revered soul of so and so person be remembered here! The work of the
ceremony is performed by the order of so and so hence may the share of
meritorious deeds reach him! May the orderer of that ceremonial work be co-
operator in the meritorious deeds of all the faithful ones in the seven regions
of the earth! May the day of the ceremony of this soul be happy to the order

awu For its translation, see Baz of reciting Ashem Vohu.

awv Names of persons who have departed and in whose memory the ceremony is performed are
taken here - are remembered here.


--- Page 342 ---

326 KHORDEH AVESTA

of that ceremony!

“Tn the Gah (so and so) we worship all the Fravashis of the righteous
(people). We worship the good, heroic and beneficent Fravashis of the
righteous (people). We worship all the Holy yazatas.

DOA TANDAROSTI (IN AVESTA)

(1) Tao! ahmi? nmane’ jamyaresh‘, yao* ashaonam’® khshnitascha’,
ashayascha’, vyadaibishcha’, paiti-zantayascha"”; us" ni” anghai® vise"
jamyat'’ ashemcha™, khshathremcha!’, savascha'’, khvarenascha”,
khvathremcha”. Daregh6-fratemathwemcha”! anghao” daénayao” yat*4
Ahur6oish** Zarathushtrdish”. (2) Asishta?’ ni?®* anghat” hacha* visat*!
gaush” buyat*; asishtem™ ashem*, asishtem* narsh*’ ashaond* aojo”’,
asisht6” Ahuirish*! tkaésho”. (3) Jamyan*® ithra* ashaunim*
vanguhish* sirao*’” spentao* fravashayé”, ashdish*’ baéshaza*!
hachimnao” zem-frathangha® danu-dra-jangha™, hvare-barezangha*;
ishtée* vanghangham’*’, paitishtatée*® ataranam®, frasha-vakhshyai®
rayamcha®! khvarenanghamcha”.

(1) May these’ (virtues mentioned) which? (are) the satisfaction’ of the
righteous® (people), (their) blessings’, guileless nature® and thanksgiving’®
come* in to this? *“Yhouse*! Now” for this’ village’* may there arise’!!®
righteousness'®, sovereignty'’, *’prosperity'’, glory’? and **happiness””!
(May there be) long enduring predominance”! (or excellence) of this
Religion? of Ahura revealed by Zarathushtra®*! (2) Now** from*° this”
clan?! may there arise*’ “°always”’ cattle**! righteousness**, power” of holy**

man’ and the Law” of Ahura*’.

Explanation:- (May there be eternal increase of cattle in this clan! And
may righteousness and strength for performing righteous acts and the Law of
Ahura be always current and there may not be disturbance of any kind in
them!)

aww The name of the Gah during which the ceremony is performed is to be taken; e.g. Havan,
Rapithwan, etc. After the recital is finished in baz - (in low tone) - the translation occurring in
the para of these four lines is to be recited aloud.

awx The entire portion of this Doa Tandarosti (paras 2-7) is taken from yasna HS 60. Moreover
the same Avesta is recited also as Afrinagan Dahman.

awy i.e. in order to give proper protection of wealth, etc., to virtuous and just persons, and in or-
der to defeat wicked persons by destroying them.

awz The meaning of savascha is benefit, profit and prolific as well.
axa The meanings of khvarenascha khvathremcha are “glory and splendour”.

axb The original meaning of asishta is “rapid of all”; its another form is Gsishta, (see Hom yasht
Large, karda 1, para 15). Prof. Darmesteter explains this word as:- Without name (a + sishta);
root syanh. From this root Prof. Darmesteter takes paiti syodiim as “‘you cut it” (see yasna Ha
48, para 7).


--- Page 343 ---

DOA TANDAROSTI (IN AVESTA) 327

(3) May the good*, heroic*’ and beneficent*® Fravashis of the righteous

(people)* bringing with them™ the means*' of holiness*, as wide as the
earth®, as extensive as river™ (and) as exalted as the sun®, “°come® in this
*dabode. Explanation:- (As to why do the Fravashis come is stated as

follows).

For the fulfilment of desires” of better (men)°’, for withstanding®* wicked
(men)* and for the greater increase of wealth’ and ™‘fame®, may the
Fravashis” come*® in this abode“!

(4) Vainit® ahmi* nmane® Sraosh6® asrushtin”, Aakhshtish®
anakhshtim”, raitish” araitim”, armaitish” taromaitim”, arshukhdho”
vakhsh’> mithaokhtem” vachim”, asha drujem”. (5) Yatha” ahmya*®
Ameshao* Spenta® Sraoshadha® ashyadha™ paitishan® vanghish*
yasnascha®’ vahmascha*, vohi® yasnemcha” vahmemcha”, huberetim-
cha”, ushta-beretimcha”, vanta-bererImcha™ adareghat® khvabairyat”.
(6) Ma’’ yave”* imat” nmanem! khvathravat! khvareno? frazahit*?; ma‘
khvathravaiti> ishtish®, ma’ khvathravaiti® 4sna’  frazaintish’;
khvathrod"-disyehe" paiti’? ashdishcha’ vanghuydo’ dareghem™
hakhma".

(4) In this house® may obedience® smite disobedience®’! May peace“
smite® discord®! May generosity” smite® nigardlines” (or avarice for
wealth”)! May reverence” smite® pride™! May truth (the true-spoken
word)” ™smite® (the word” false-spoken”) falsehood “distorting truth”!
(5) So that” in this (abode)* through the Holy*Sraosha (yazata)® the
Bountiful Immortals*'** (Ameshaspands) desire eagerly® (or expect eagerly)
good® yasnas*’ and invocations*, good® yazishna” and invocation’', good
gift’, health-giving gift’ and friendly offering’. May (this clan) protect
itself® for a long time”! (6) May the glory? giving comfort and ease’,
happiness®, offspring, (and) innate wisdom never’’** leave this” house!™!
May the long!’ friendship of Ashishvangh which gives “*comfort and ease!’
never’’** leave? this” house!°!™"

axc Its significance seems to be that the Fravashis of the righteous people come in the house,
and bring happiness of the entire world with them.

axd i.e. in this clan; original meaning is “hither” (ithra).
axe The meaning rayamcha khvarenanghamcha is also “glory and splendour’.

axf i.e. May the virtues, such as obedience, unity, liberality, politeness, truthfulness, remain per-
manent amongst men of this clan and they may live always in peace and friendship with one an-
other.

axg Instead of considering asha-drujem as an adjective of vachim, asha drujem are taken separ-
ately, the meaning could be “may truthfulness smite falsehood”.

axh The original meaning of khvathro-disyehe is directing to ease-happiness.

axi For further details, see my translation of Yasna, Ha 60.


--- Page 344 ---

328 KHORDEH AVESTA

DOA TANDAROSTI (IN PAZEND)

Ba name yazade bakhshayandehe bakhshayashgare meherban.
Yatha Ahi Vairy6 2.

Tan-dorosti' dér-zivashn?’ Avayad*; khoreh* anghad* ashahidar‘°;
yazdane mindan’, yazdane getian®, haft Ameshaspandan’ myazda
roshan’’ hame" berasad”. In doaya® bad", in khoaha'’ bad'*®; hame!’
andar kasara'® Zarathushti din” shad bad”; aedin bad?!. Ya bari
khoda”! Khodavande alamra”’, hame anjumanra” (here take the name of
a person in whose behest the tandarosti is recited). Ba farzandan™, hazar
sal’° dér bedar?’, shad bedar”*, tan-dorost bedar”; aediin bedar*’. Bar
sare*! arzania, salhae besyar® va karanhae bishumar™ baki va payandeh
dar**; hazaran hazar* afrin bad*’, sal-khozasteh bad**, roz farrokh
bad®, mah mubarak bad*. Chand sal*', chand roz”, chand mah*®,
besyar sal* arzanidar*, yazashne* va niaeshne” va radi va zor
barashne*”. Ashahidar*’ avare*! hama karo kerfeha*’; tandorosti bad**,
neki bad™, khib bad**; aediin bad*’, aediintaraz bad*’, pa yazdan va
Ameshaspandan*® kame” bad. Ashem Vohi 1.

In order to live for a long time’, health of the body’ is necessary*. May
the glory’ remain permanent? in association with righteousness! May all
these" heavenly yazatas’ (and) the yazatas of this world® (and) the seven
Ameshaspand® come'* to this excellent votive offering'®! May this
benediction’? (of mine) be'* (approved)! May this wish (of mine)! be
fulfilled'®! May the Religion of Zarathushtra’’ be pleased” (liked or chosen)
amongst all!” men'*! May it be ™so!!

O God! the Creator! May you keep forever’, cheerful, healthy the ““Lord
of this world?’, all the assemblies™* (*'so and so) together with (his)
descendants”; ““may you keep (them) thus*’. Over the chieftainship*! of the
good (or worthy) men*? may you keep permanent and Lord for many years*
and for boundless *"period**. May there be a thousand* blessings*”! May the
year be auspicious**! May the day be fortunate*? (And) may the month be
auspicious“! May you keep us worthy* (in performing) the worship*® and
invocation’ and charity*® and in offering libations” for several years*',
several days”, and several months*; for many years“! May you keep
righteousness over all actions and meritorious deeds! May there be health
and goodness (unto thee)**! May there be excellence (unto thee)*! May it be

axj i.e. May it be so as I pray! Amen!

axk i.e. him who rules over us at present; our King.

axl The name of the person in whose honour the prayer is made should be taken here.
axm i.e. Keep in the manner I bless.

axn The meaning of “karan” is age, a decade, century; it may mean 120 years also.


--- Page 345 ---

DOA TANDAROSTI (IN PAZEND) 329

so! May it be *“°more so*”! May (thy) wish® be® in accordance with*® (the
wish of) the yazatas and the Ameshaspand*™!

DIN-NO KALAMO (in Avesta) - THE ZOROASTRIAN
CREED (Yasna Ha 12)

(1) Naismi' daév6?; fravarane> Mazdayasno‘ Zarathushtrish*
vidaévo® Ahura-tkaésho’ staota® Ameshanam Spentanam’, yashta'®
Ameshanam Spentanam". Ahurai Mazdai'’ vanghave'? vohumaite™,
vispa'* vohi’® chinahmi'’, ashaune’® raévaite’? khvarenanguhaite”. Ya”!
zi chicha? vahishta™*; yenghe*> gaush’, yenghe’’ ashem”, yenghe”
raochao”, yenghe*! raochebish” rdithwen® khvathra™.

(1) I cause’ the daevas? to perish'.1 confess myself (to be*) a worshipper
of (the Creator) Ahura Mazda‘, a follower of the religion revealed by the
Prophet Zarathushtra’, inimical to (the doctrines of) the daevas®, acting
according to the Law of Ahura Mazda’, a praiser of the Holy Immortals’
(and) a worshipper’? of the Holy Immortals''. Unto Ahura Mazda’, the
Good’, possessed of goodness’, the Holy'®, possessing riches!’ (and)
Glorious” do I attribute’’ all’* things'® (of the world); because’ whatsoever?!
things” (are) best** (are all His). Whose” (i.e. the Creator Ahura Mazda’s)
“Puniverse*®, Righteousness”, the lights (of the sky), splendour ““thave
blended* with (the infinite) lights (in the sky).

(2) Spentam*’ Armaitim*® vanguhim:’ verene**; ha? moi“ asta“. Us
géush” stuye* taydatcha* hazang-hatcha* us mazdayasnanam
visam“”’, zyanayaécha* vivapatcha®. (3) Fra manyaéibyo” raonghe*!
vase-yaitim® vase-sheitim®, yaish* upairl aya zema™ gaobish**
shyeinti*’. Nemangha® ashai® uzdata® paiti avat® stuye”, noit® ahmat™
azyaonim®, noit® vivapem” khshta® Mazdayasnish® aoi” viso”; noit”
ast6”, noit’? ushtanahe”® chinmani”.

(2) I choose** the good*’ (and) beneficent*> *"Armaiti®*; may she be*!
mine’! (i.e. I wish that I may get her blessings). I protect by performing
prayer (of Ahura Mazda)* the cattle” from the thief and the robber* and
the villages‘? of Mazda-worshippers*® from the damage*? caused by
drought”.

(3) I shall praise* (Ahura Mazda) with *“fervent® hymns” through the

axo i.e. May my wishes be fulfilled, rather may my wishes be fulfilled more!

axp In Avesta common meaning of gaush, geush is cattle, “beneficent animal”, but elsewhere
corresponding to the Sanskrit equivalent go its meaning is “earth”, as well.

axq For its analogy, see yasna Ha 31, stanza 7.

axr The meaning of Armaiti (= Sanskrit Armati) is contemplative manashni, good thought, wis-
dom, amiable manners and self-restraint or abstinence from sins.

axs The word uzdata is derived from the root us-da. Its meaning is to effervesce, to boil; then its


--- Page 346 ---

330 KHORDEH AVESTA

Spiritual Lords® in order to grant*! unto those* who live*’ upon this earth*
“possessing property’ power of moving about at will and the power of
ruling at will®’; (and) for the sake of righteousness” (i.e. in order that they
may live righteously) (so that) hereafter“! shall not® stand® (i.e. I shall not
be responsible) (for bringing) damage® (and) drought®’ to the villages” of
the Mazda-worshippers®™; neither ““for the love” of (my) body” nor” for the

love of (my) life”.

(4) Vi daévaish” aghaish”’, avanghish”, anaretaish®, akodabish*!
sarem®” mruye®; hatam* draojishtaish*, hatam*’ paoshishtaish*’,
hatam® avanghutemaish”. Vi daévaish”, vi daévavatbish”', vi yatush”,
vi yatumatbish”, vi kahyachit’ hatam® Ataraish’*, vi manebish’’, vi
vachebish®*, vi shyaothanaish”; vi chithraish’. Vi zi’ ana? sarem?
mruye’, yathana® dregvata® rakhshayanta’.

(4) I do not accept® (or I hate*) the chieftainship* of the daevas”,
wicked”, without goodness”, not going in the straight path*®, (and) evil-
knowing*' (who are) most untruthful®, filthy®’ (or polluted)*’ (and) wicked®
among the existing ones®.

Just as> I “‘hate* the chieftainship’ of the false® (and) tormenting
(persons)’, *“in the same manner’! verily! hate* openly!” through (my)
thought’’, word” and actions” the chieftainship* of the daevas!°and of those
belonging to the daevas”! (i.e. of those going on the path of the daevas), the
wizards” and belonging to the wizards”®, of any™ wicked’ (man)

whatsoever™ among the existing ones”.

(5) Atha atha® choit? Ahurd Mazdad" Zarathushtrem"™ adha”
khshayaéta’, vispaéshi* frashnaéshi'> vispaeshi'® hanjamanaéshu”,
yaish'* aperesaétem'’ Mazdaoscha” Zarathushtrascha”'. (6) Atha atha”
choit® Zarathushtré daévaish?> sarem”* vyamravita”’ vispaéshi'’ frash-
naéshi'*, vispaéshi'® hanjamanaéshi'’, yaish'® aperesaétem”
Mazdaoscha” Zarathushtrascha”'; atha*® azemchit” yo°° Mazdayasno"!

religious sense can be like the word in English, “fervent” (the original meaning according to the
root of which is “to effervesce, to boil’).

axt Original meaning “with the cattle”. In ancient times the property of the people was in terms
of cattle. The word for “money” in English is derived from the word pashu:- Pecuniary, Fee.

axu i.e. Even though harm may reach my body or my life be forfeited, I will not cause damage
of any kind whatsoever to the Mazda-worshippers.

axv For its comparison, see yasna Ha 49, Stanza 3. The meaning of Avesta mru (Sanskrit bru) is
to “speak”; but when this root is used with different prefixes, its meaning is changed:- e.g. ni-
mrii means “to request”, “to demand”; paiti-mru means “to answer”; “to reply”; d-mrii means
“to call, to invoke”; vi-mri, antare-mri means “to abjure, to deny, to forsake, not to accept, to

renounce”.

axw The meaning of the word and which is derived from the Sanskrit e, resembles to Latin idem
(= likewise) as an adverb. Generally, ana, and (Sanskrit anen) is demonstrative pronoun mascu-
line and/or neuter third person singular.


--- Page 347 ---

DIN-NO KALAMO (i Avesta) - THE ZOROASTRIAN CREED (Yasna Hi 12) 331

Zarathushtrish® daévaish® sarem™“ vimruye* yatha** *“andish*’ vya-
mravita*® ye® ashava” Zarathushtro“'.

(5-6) When'® during all’? the questions and answers!°, during all'® the
meetings’? (the Creator) Ahura Mazda’? “ordered? (the Prophet)
Zarathushtra'! by way of injunction’ (to reliquish the chieftainship of the
daevas); (based upon this) the Holy*® Zarathushtra*! assuredly? renounced”’
the chieftainship*® of the daevas”, in the same way*® I?? who* (am) the
Mazda-worshipping®’ follower of Zarathushtra* *“renounce* their
chieftainship™.

(7) Yavaranao*! apd”, yavaranao“ urvarao*, yavarana* gaush’’
hudao*, yavarano” Ahurd Mazdad™, ye! gam® dada, ye narem™
ashavanem™; yavarano*’ as*® Zarathushtro”, yavarand® kava
Vishtasp0"', yavarana” Frashaoshtra® Jamaspa™; yavarano® kashchit%
saoshyantam”  haithyavarezam® ashaunim®, ta  varenacha”
tkaéshacha”.

(7) Of what faith” (are) the waters“, of what** faith (are) well-created*
cattle’; of what faith” (is) Ahura Mazda’, who*! created® (this) world”
(and) who™ created? the holy*® man*; **of what faith*’ was°* Zarathushtra
(the Prophet), of what faith® (was) Kava Vishtaspa‘', of what faith (were)
*y’Farashostara® and ™°Jamaspa™, (and) of what faith (has been) any
person® amongst the holy”, truth-working® (and) beneficent (men); of what
faith” and of that Law”! (am I).

(8) Mazdayasno ahmi; Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish fravarane Asti-
tascha fravaretascha. Astuye humatem mano, Astuye hikhtem vacho,
astute hvarshtem shyaothnem. (9) Astuye daénam vanguhim Mazda-
yasnim, fraspayaokhedhram, nidhasnaithishem, khvaétvadatham, asha-

axx Andish is a pronoun standing for the noun daévdish.

axy The root khshi = Sanskrit khshi = to order, to command. If we follow the reading
adhakhshayaeta according to Dr. Geldner’s Avestan edition, it would mean then “instructed”;
root dakhsh, a-dakhsh = Sanskrit d-dish, upa-dish = to instruct.

axz In the original Avesta some words of this paragraph are repeated twice (to be more effect-
ive):- e.g. “vipaéshii frashnaéshii; vispaéshtii hanjamanaéshi, yaish aperesaétem Mazdaoscha
Zarathushtrascha;” however I have translated these words Zarathushtro vyamravita only once.

aya Ya = Sanskrit ya = what; varana, varena = faith, belief, creed, a religious doctrine or cus-
tom; besides varana = Sanskrit varana = choice, desire; the original meaning of yavaranao is,
“of what choice”.

ayb Saoshyantam - the meaning of this word is, “beneficent to the world” and, “givers of light to
men”, i.e. bringing the people from darkness into light and pointing out the divine, moral path.
When this word comes in the plural, it is used for the prophets prior to the advent of the Prophet
Zarathushtra (viz. Gayamard, Hoshang, Tehmurasp, Faridoon, Kai Khaosrau, etc.) and when
employed in the singular number, it stands for the Saoshyant — the future benefactor.

ayc Farashostara and Jamaspa were two brothers of the family of Hvova; for further details see
my translation of Yasna and Vispered, Ha 12, para 7, and my Avesta dictionary.


--- Page 348 ---

332 KHORDEH AVESTA

onim; ya haitinamcha, bishyeintinamcha mazishtacha vahishtacha
sraéshtacha, ya ahiirish Zarathushtrish; Ahurai Mazdai vispa vohi
chinahmi. Aésha asti daénayao MazdayasnOish Astiitish.** Ashem Vohi
1.

A SHORT SYNOPSIS OF DIN-NO KALAMO (ice.
THE ZOROASTRIAN CREED).

I am the hater and destroyer of all the daevas, and idol-worship. I am the
praiser of the Ameshaspands or Holy Immortals and their glorifier. I am the
worshipper of the Creator of the entire world who is Omnipotent and
Omniscient, Ahura Mazda. I accept to remove the distress and difficulty
from the houses of the Mazda-worshipping people and to protect the cattle
and beneficent animals from thieves and robbers. I hate to live under the
authority of lying and wicked men, and of the sorcerers. I aspire to act in
accordance with the religion and custom which the Prophet Holy
Zarathushtra, Kava Vishtaspa, Farashostara and Jamasp followed, and which
other truth-speaking (truthful) righteous men have acted upon. I am a
Mazda-worshipper. As a Mazda-worshipping follower of Zarathushtra I like
to be the praiser of the Zoroastrian Religion and to keep full faith on that
good Religion. I praise good thought, good word and good deed. I praise the
good Mazda-worshipping Religion which is, promoting peace and concord,
fostering brotherhood and just. The religion of Ahura Mazda revealed by
Zarathushtra is the best amongst those religions that are, that shall be
hereafter, and I accept it with sincere heart.

DIN-NO KALAMO, THE ZOROASTRIAN CREED
Razishtayao' chistayao? Mazdadhatayao* ashaonyao* daenayao*
vanghuyao* Mazdayasnoish’.
Din’ beh? rast'® va dorost", ke khodae” bar khalk"® ferastadeh" in!’
hast!* ke!” Zartosht'® avordeh hast’; din?’ dine! Zartosht”2, dine? Ahura
Mazda” dadeh** Zartosht”* ashaone”’ Ashem Vohi 1.

(This Zoroastrian Creed should be recited thrice).

(May there be propitiation) of the just! and holy* knowledge’ created by
Ahura Mazda? (i.e. of Religious Education) and of the good® Mazda-
worshipping’ Religion®!

This’> is’® (the Religion) - the good’, the just'® and the perfect'' religion®
which the Creator Hormazd” sent'* for the people of this world’? and which”’
(the Prophet) Zarathushtra'* (Himself) brought'®. (That) Religion’? is the
Religion” of Zarathushtra” (and) the Religion® of Hormazd™, which (the

ayd For the translation of this paragraph, see Jasa Me Avanghe Mazda.


--- Page 349 ---

DIN-NO KALAMO, THE ZOROASTRIAN CREED 333

Creator Hormazd) gave” to Holy”’ Zarathushtra” (for propagating in this
world).

Explanation:- (The portion from “razishtayao” up to “Mazdayasnoish”
is taken from the “khshnuman” - propitiatory formula - of Din yazata, and it
is in Avestan language. The remaining portion from “Din beh rast” up to
“Dadeh Zartosht” is in Persian. The Zoroastrian Creed is written in the
Avesta Language itself. Better than this is yasna Ha 12; see previous pages).

NIRANG TO BE RECITED AFTER THE RECITATION
OF NYAYESH AND YASHT

DaénayAo! vanghuyao* MazdayasnOish’.

Din‘ beh’ rast* va’ dorost’, ke? khodae” bar" khalk” ferastadeh”®, in‘
hast'S ké’® Zartosht!” avordeh'® hast”; Din’? dine?’ Zartosht?', dine”
Ahura Mazda”, dadeh™ Zartosht*, bishak” va?’ biguman’’, rast”? Dine*’
Zartosht*! Spitaman®”. Ae yazdan* badargahe td“ hazaran hazar*,
bivar hazaran hazar* sepas”’ mikunam*, ke dar“ dine*! Zartosht”
mara® peda“ bekard*; az** barkate”’ dine u*® man®” dar garothman*®
yakin®! khaham shud. Yakin® khaham™ ke, jumlé* baste-kushtiane*
niku-kerdarane*’ haft keshvar zamin*®, ba ma~ ham4-zor® bad". Yak”
az ma® shomordan™ hazar® bad®.

Kabilat” bad® yaksar® puzeshe ma”,
Ba dargahat” rasad” A4morzeshe ma”.
Gunah guzarashne”, kerfeh afzayashne’*. Ashem Vohii 1.

(This entire Nirang should be recited thrice.)

(May there be the propitiation) of the good’, Mazda-worshipping*
Religion’!

This" is!> (the religion) - good’, true® and’ perfect® which’ the Creator
Hormazd”’ sent!? for the people of this world''”, and which’® (the Prophet)
Zartosht (himself) brought'’. (That) Religion’? is the Religion” of Zartosht”!
(and the Religion” of Hormazd™; gave™* unto (Holy) Zartosht”> (that
Religion) (for propagating into this world); (this fact is) without doubt’® and?’
(unquestionable)**. The Religion*® of Spitaman® Zartosht*! (is) truthful”. O
God*! I offer** millions** and **crores** of thanks*’ to Thy doorway* that*?
you gave birth*’* to me® in the Religion***! of Zartosht”. By means of the
blessings***’ of his (i.e. Zartosht’s) Religion® (i.e. by enjoying the life in
accordance with the best commandments of this truthful religion) I will
assuredly*' go’ to the Gardthman Heaven*’. Moreover, I sincerely* wish™
that all°> true and virtuous*’ Zoroastrians”* of the Seven regions of the Earth*®
may be® co-operators® with me® (or the receivers of the shares of

aye Crore = ten million.


--- Page 350 ---

334 KHORDEH AVESTA

meritorious deeds”). The appealing™ once® from us® may be equivalent® to
a thousand-fold®!

(O Holy Creator!) our earnest prayer” (performed for the sake of sin)
may be® fully® accepted® by you! (And) may our apology” reach” you in
your doorway”!

May our sins be forgiven“! May our meritorious deeds be on the
increase”!

101 NAMES

During the yasna ceremony, at the time of continuous sprinkling of water
in the utensil by means of the silver ring covered with the hair of the holy
White bull, 101 efficacious names of the Holy Lord which are remembered
in a whisper or low tone are as follows:-

1. **Yazad = Worthy of worship.

2. **Harvesp-tavan = Omnipotent.

3. *"Harvesp-agah = Omniscient.

4. Harvesp-khuda = The Lord of all.

5. Abadah = Without beginning.

6. Abi-anjam = Without end.

7. Bune-stih = The origin of the formation of the world
8. Frakhtan-teh = Broad end of all.

9. Jamaga = Greatest Cause.

10. Parjatarah = More exalted.

11. Tum-afik = Most innocent.

12. Abarvand = Apart from everyone.

13. Parvanda = Relation with all.

14. An-aiyafah = Incomprehensible by anyone.
15. Ham-aiyafah = Comprehensible of all.

16. Adard = Most straight, most just.

17. Gira = Holding fast all.

18. A-chem = Without reason.

19. Chamana = Reason of reasons.

20. *"Safana = Increaser.

21. Afza = Causer of increase. (The Lord of Purity)
22. Nasha = Reaching all equally.

23. ™iParvara = Nourisher.

24. Tyanah = Protector of the world.

ayf See yasna Ha 16.1 “Mazishtem yazatem”
ayg See Gatha Ha 51.17 “Khshayas”

ayh See Vendidad 19; 20. “Visp6d-vidvao”; Gatha Ha 45.3 “Vidvao”; Gatha Ha 46.19
“Vaédishtd”

ayi See Hormazd yasht para 8 “Dasem6 yat ahmi spano”.

ayj See Hormazd yasht para 13 “Thrata nama ahmi”.


--- Page 351 ---

101 NAMES

335

25. Ain-denah = Not of various kinds.

26. An-ainah = Without form.

27. **Khroshid-tum = Firmest.

28. *'Mind-tum = Most invisible.

29. Vasna = Omnipresent.

30. *"Harvastum = Allin all.

31. Hu-sepas = Worthy of thanks.

32. Har-hamid = All good-natured.

33. *"Har-nek-fareh = All good auspicious-glory.

34. *Besh-tarana = Remover of affliction.
35. Taronish = The triumphant

36. An-aoshak = Immortal.

37. Farasak = Fulfiller of wishes.

38. Pajoh-dahad = Creator of good nature.
39. *?Khvafar = Beneficent.

40. Afakhshiaea = Bestower of Love.

41. Abarza = Excessive bringer.

42. A-satoh = Undefeated, undistressed.
43. Rakhoh = Independent, carefree.
44. Varun = Protector from evil.

45. *4A-farefah = Undeceivable.

46. *"Be-farefah = Undeceived.

47. A-dui = Unparalleled.

48. **Kame-rad = Lord of wishes.

49. Farman-kam = Only Wish is His Command.
50. Aekh-tan = Without body.

51. **A-faremosh = Unforgetful.

52. *"Hamarna = Taker of accounts.

53. *"Sandea = Recognizable, worth recognition.
54. A-tars = Fearless.

ayk See yasna Ha 1| “Khraozdishtahecha”.

=99

ayl See Hormazd yasht para 12 “Mainyushcha ahmi spentotemo
“Ayese yeshti yim Ahurem Mazdam mainyaom mainyavanam”.

. AJso Vispered 2, para 4

aym See Hormazd yasht para 7 “Pukhdha vispa vohtii Mazdadhata asha-chitra”.
ayn See Hormazd yasht para 14 “Vispa-khvathra nama ahmi”.

ayo See Hormazd yasht para 14 ““Tbaésh6-taurvao nama ahmi”.

ayp See Gatha Ha 44, Stanza 5 “Hvapao”.

ayq See Hormazd yasht para 14 “Vidavish nama ahmi”.

ayr See Hormazd yasht para 14 “Adavish nama ahmi”.

ays See Hormazd yasht para 13 “Ise-khshathro nama ahmi”.

ayt See Gatha Ha 29.4 “Mazdao sakhare mairishto”.

ayu See Hormazd Yasht para 8 “Khshvash-dasa hatamarenish” and Gatha Ha 32.6 “hata-
marane”.

ayv See Hormazd yasht para 13 “Znata nama ahmi”.


--- Page 352 ---

336 KHORDEH AVESTA

55.“ A-Bish = Without affliction or torment.

56. Afrazdum = Most exalted.

57. °*“Ham-chun = Always uniform.

58. °YMin6-stih-gar = Creator of the Universe spiritually.

59. A-Min6-gar = Creator of much spirituality.

60. Minod-nahab = Hidden in the Spirits.

61. Adar-bad-gar = Air of fire, i.e. transformer into air.

62. Adar-nam-gar = Water of fire, i.e. transformer into water.
63. Bad-adar-gar = “Bad”, i.e. transformer of air into fire.
64. Bad-nam-gar = “Bad”, i.e. transformer of air into water.
65. Bad-gel-gar = “Bad”, i.e. transformer of air into earth.
66. Bad-gerad-tum = “Bad”, i.e. transformer of air into Girad”, i.e. gathered.
67. Adar-kibarit-tum = Transformer of fire into jewels.

68. Bad-gar-jae = Doer of “Bad” everywhere.

69. Ab-tum = Creator of most excessive water.

70. Gel-adar-gar = Transformer of the earth into fire.

71. Gel-vad-gar = Transformer of the earth into air.

72. Gel-nam-gar = Transformer of the earth into water.

73. Gar-gar = The artisan of artisans.

74. Gar-0-gar = * * HO?

75. Gar-a-gar = eee

76. Gar-a-gar-gar =e RR

77. A-gar-a-gar = eH

78. A-gar-4-gar-gar = eH

79, *“A-guman = Without doubt.

80. A-zaman = Without time.

81. *”A-khuan = Without sleep.

82. Amasht = Intelligent.

83. °“Fshutana = Eternal protector-increaser.

84. Padmani = Maintainer of “padman”’, i.e. the golden mean.
85. Firozgar = Victorious.

86. Khudavand = The Lord-Master of the Universe.

87. “*Ahur-Mazd = Lord Omniscient.

88. Abarin-kohun-tavan = Of the most exalted rank in the power of maintaining

ayw See Fravardin yasht para 34 “Atbishtao” and Gatha Ha 29.3 “A-dvaésho”. Ram yasht para
47 “tbaesho-taro”.

ayx See Gatha Ha 31.7 “nuremchit Ahura hamo”.
ayy See Vispered 2 para 4 “Mainyayao stdish ahtmcha ratimcha”.

ayz The meanings of 74-78 are not satisfactorily explained on the basis of philology, hence are
not given here. These names should be from the word “gar”, which occurs more than once dif-
ferently, meaning, “workmanship” or the “power of creatorship”. In other books meanings are
found in this way: 74 The bestower of wishes; 75 The creator of man; 76 The creator of the en-
tire creation; 77 The creator of four elements 78 The creator of clusters of the stars.

aza See Gatha Ha 31.2 “Adhvao.”
azb See Vendidad 19, para 20 “Akhvafno ahi abahgho tim yo Ahuro Mazdao”.
azc See Hormazd yasht para 13 “fshumao nama ahmi”.

azd See Hormazd yasht para | “Peresat Zarathushtro Ahurem Mazdam, Ahura Mazda”.


--- Page 353 ---

101

89.

90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.

NAMES

Abarin-no-tavan

Vaspan

Vaspar
™“*Khavar

azf ‘Ahu

8 Avakhshidar
"Dadar
RayoOmand
iKhorehOmand
Davar

Kerfegar

100. *“Bokhtar
101. *“Frash-gar

337

the origin of the creations.

= Of the most exalted rank in the power of rendering the
creations anew

= Attainer to all the creations.

= Bringer of and attainer to all.

= Merciful.

= The Lord of the world.

= The forgiver.

= The just creator.

= Full of rae — lustre-splendour.

= Full of khoreh i.e. glory.

= The just judge.

= The Lord of meritorious deeds.

= The redeemer, Saviour.

= Frashogard”, i.e. the Restorer through the increase of
the soul.

MONAJAT to be recited any time.
(Composed by Dastur Mullan Feroze, son of Mullan Kaus).

(1)

(1)

(2)

(2)

Bar Avor dela daste hajat daraz,
Ba dargahe bihajate chareh-saz.

O heart! do thou raise thy needy hands with homage at the doorway
of (the Almighty Lord) who is without want and the healer (of all

difficulties).

Do dasti bar Avor ze jano ze del,
Ke karti birun nayad az dasté gel.

Do thou raise both thy hands in humilty by means of thy life and

aze See Fravardin yasht para 32 “Khvaparao”.

azf See Vispered 2 para 7 “Hv6o zi asti Ahumacha ratimacha yo Ahuro Mazdao.”

azg See Gatha Ha 31, Stanza 10 “Bakhshta”.

azh See Hormazd yasht para | “Datare gaethanam astvaitinam.”

azi See Hormazd yasht para 22 “Raévantem”.

azj See Hormazd yasht para 22 “Khvarenanguhantem”.

azk See Ram yasht para 47 “Bukhtish nama ahmi” and Vispered 7 para 3 “Tanvo-baokhtarem”.

azl See Beheram yasht para 28 “Frashokare”.


--- Page 354 ---

338

(3)
(3)
(4)

(4)

(5)
(5)
(6)
(6)
(7)
(7)
(8)

(8)

(9)
(9)
(10)

(10)

KHORDEH AVESTA

heart (i.e. by means of pure mind and conscience), because no work
can be accomplished by means of the material hands.

Sare gel makun siiye haq bar faraz,
Sare del bokun ta shavi sar-faraz.

Raise not thy material head but thy head of conscience towards God,
so that thou mayest be of exalted rank.

Do dasté del ay abde umidvar,
Chi shakhe khezan bar dare haq bar 4r.

O man hoping to fulfil the wishes! like the branch of a tree of the
season of Autumn, do thou raise both thy hands of conscience at the
doorway of God with entreaty.

Ba fasle khezan barg rizad darakht,
Bemanad kuru mandeh bibarg sakht.

During the autumn season the leaves of trees wither; hence without
leaves the tree as it were becomes feeble and distressed.

Bar arad dO dast az paye barge khish,
Khodayash bahar Avorad nav bapish.

For the sake of leaves the tree raises both its hands with humility, the
Almighty Lord creates the Spring Season full of verdure from that.

Diger reh dehad s4zo barge navash,
Dehad jameh chi tazeh kay Khosrovash.

That Lord bestows upon that tree new leaves and freshness anew and
bestows new dress like the King Kaikhosrou.

Pas ay bandeh gafel nishastan cheraAst,
Gushadeh ze har siiye babe doast.

Therefore, O man! why dost thou sit indifferently as the gate of
blessings is open from all sides, (i.e. if thou wilt perform homage
with sincere heart, thy wishes will be fulfilled).

Khodaya! ba lotfo ba ename khish

MarAan In gunehgare As! ze pish.

O God! do not drive away from Thee this Thy sinful person by way
of love and grace.

Keh khanad ba pisham chi td raniam,
Keh ranad ze pisham chi to khaniam.

When Thou (O Lord of the Universe!) wilt drive me away from Thee,
who will call me? Moreover, when Thou wilt call me before Thee,
who will drive me away?


--- Page 355 ---

MONAJAT To BE RECITED ANY TIME. 339

(11)
(11)
(12)
(12)
(13)

(13)

(14)
(14)
(15)
(15)
(16)

(16)

(17)
(17)
(18)
(18)
(19)

(19)

Umidam ba joz td nabashad ze kas,
Ba to daram umide enam06 bas.

Except Thee (O Lord of gifts) I do not from any man keep the hope;
only have hopes of obtaining gifts from Thee alone.

Ze to jumleh khibi ba man baratast,

Ze man Aancheh Ayad sarasar khatast.

From Thee there is the gift of entire goodness on me; but from me
there is (nothing) to (offer to) Thee except sin and transgression.
Nagiyam khodaya zaram bakhshoO sim,

Gunaham babakhsha ke hastam asim.

O Almighty Lord! I do not say that Thou dost grant me gold and
silver (i.e. do Thou enrich me with wealth); only this much I ask of
Thee: forgive my sins, because I am a sinner.

To gar befgani dast keh giradam,

To ham gar berani keh bepziradam.

If Thou wilt deprive me, who will grant me support? If Thou wilt
drive me out, who will accept me?

Ketabe siyeh kariam dar baghal,

Furu mandeam hamchi khar dar vahal.

Having the book with notes of my wicked deeds under the arm-pit, I
repent like an ass plunged in the mire.

Keh juz to bar arad mara zabd gel,

Ba 4b0 gelam dast gird mahel.

From the water and the mud, (i.e. from ignorance) who will draw me
out (O Merciful Lord!) save Thee? Be Thou Helper unto me for
drawing me out of it and do not let me remain therein.

Agar pur-gunaham mane sharmasar,
Ze ehsan baram Abe rehmat bebar.

If shamefully I am replete with sins, do Thou (O God!) sprinkle upon
me water of mercy through Thy grace (i.e. have mercy on me).

Agar natavani fetad zire pay,
Chi girand dastash bekhizad ze jay.

If any weak person would fall down and if anyone would help him
holding his hands, that person would stand up again.

Man an na-tavanam fetadeh asir,
Khodaya! se rehamt mara dast gir.

I am that weak, fallen captive of Thine. Therefore, O Lord! mayest


--- Page 356 ---

340

KHORDEH AVESTA

Thou be my helper by showing mercy on me!

MONAJAT IN PRAISE OF THE HOLY CREATOR.

(1)
(1)
(2)
(2)
(3)
(3)
(4)
(4)
(5)

(5)

(6)
(6)
(7)
(7)
(8)

(8)

*“™Chu amad ba jumbesh nakhostin kalam,
Ba name jehan-afrin zad rakam.

At first when the pen began to shake (i.e. began to write), it wrote the
name of the Creator of the World.

Khodavande janod khodaye ravan,

Khodavande hasti-deho meherban.

(The Almighty Lord is) the bestower of life and soul, and the Lord of
the giver of existence and love.

Khodavande bido khodavande jiid,

Ze Ketme adam kard paida vojid.

(Moreover He is) the Lord of Life and Charity, who in the guise of
non-Life created existence.

Karimo rahimo tavana o hai,

Alim asto alem ala kul shai.

(That Lord is) Charitable, Merciful, Omnipotent and ever-existing,
(moreover He is) Omniscient and fully cognisant of all creations.
Khabir astd danandeh—é raze ghayb,

Basir ast0 sattare har guneh ayb.

(The Lord is) the Keeper of news (of all matters) and the Knower of
every secret mystery; (He is) the Seer with minuteness and the
Concealer (Keeper) of every kind of sin - fault.

Jehano zamano makan jumleh zist,
Vojide hamah mumken az fayze ist.

The world, the epoch, the building - all these are owing to Him; the
being of the entire creation is His gift.

Falak hamchi khalist zasare 0,
Buvad shams yak zarreh zanavare U.

In all the creations of that Lord the sky is something like a mole and
amongst all the luminaries created by Him the Sun is like an atom.

Ze hekmat hamahra padidar kard,
Basi kudrate khish ezhar kard.

He created the entire world by His Wisdom and thus made known His

azm This Monajat and the Persian couplets in the following Monajat I have taken from the book
entitled Pand-Nameh e Mulla Firuz published in the year 1834 A.D.


--- Page 357 ---

MONAJAT IN PRAISE OF THE HOLY CREATOR. 341

(9)

(9)

(10)
(10)
(11)
(11)
(12)

(12)

Endless Power.

Ba barr6 ba bahar Anche gardad padid,
Ba Frayze khodavand darad umid.

Anything whatever that exists on the land, and in the sea, hopes for
the gift of the Almighty.

Ravana4o tano jesmo jan Afrid,

Kherad dar tane marduman 4frid.

He created the soul, the body, the mind, and the life, and created
wisdom in the bodies of men.

Kherad dado aklo hisho rayo din,
Khodavande ba danesho bikarin,

The Almighty Lord who is Omnsicient and unequalled granted man
wisdom, knowledge, intelligence, faculty of thinking and religion.

Shahe bichegiin davare bihamal,
Bapayramane i nagardad zaval.

(That Lord is) the Sovereign without comparison and the unparalleled
judge; around Him destruction never turns up, i.e. He will be for ever
till eternity.

MONAJAT IN PRAISE OF THE HOLY PROPHET

ZARTOSHT

(1) Nabié bahaq morsele ba ketab,

Keh dinash buvad raushan az Aftab.

(1) A true Prophet whose religion is brighter than the Sun was sent by
God, with the Book of Religion.

(2)  Rasile Khodavande jan-afrin,

Khodavande ejazo borhano din.

(2) (He is) the Prophet sent by God, the Creator of Life, and the Lord of
the miracles, proofs, and Religion.

(3) Shahe aulia akmale ambia,

Hamah gumrehanra ba din rehnuma.

(3) He is the best among the Saints (i.e. among the friends) of God and
the most perfect amongst all the prophets and the indicator of the path
of religion to all deviating people.

(4) Khodavande farahango dine behi,

(4)

Azi tazeh shud dar jehan farrehi.

He is the Lord of Wisdom and of the good religion, by whom the


--- Page 358 ---

342

(5)
(5)
(6)

(6)

(7)

(7)

(8)
(8)
(9)
(9)
(10)

(10)

(11)
(11)
(12)

(12)

KHORDEH AVESTA

grandeur enlivened in (the whole) world.

Zaratosht Asafantamane guzin,
Keh bada ba ruhash hazar 4frin.

Spitaman Zartosht is approved by God, let there be a thousand praises
on his soul.

Fedayash hamah jane ma bandegan,
Ke alam tano i buvad hamchi jan.

May there be a dedication of the lives of all our devotees to him! As
the entire world is like the body, and he (i.e. Holy Zartosht), is like
the soul.

Ba dunia ze i raushani shud padid,
Akdhae makidra shud kelid.

Light was created by him in the world and the key to the closed (or
confused) knots was found; (i.e. through the proclamation of his
Religion the explanation of all the difficult matters was gained).

Hamah rimant az jehan dir kard,
Chi khurshid alam por az nir kard.

The Prophet Zartosht removed from the world all pollution (and evils
of the daevas and drujas) and made the world brilliant like the sun.

Rahe dine Dadare Parvardegar,
Namid i ba khalkano shud ashkar.

By showing the path of the Religion of the Creator and the Nourisher
to the people of the world, his Religion was made known everywhere.

Ze kofro zalalat hedayat namid,
Ba yazdan-parasti badayat namid.

The Prophet Zaratosht by getting rid of irreligiousness, deviation
from the right path, showed the path of Righteousness and
commenced the belief in one God only.

Haran kas buvad bar rehash bigum4n,

Nabinad ghamt-i-ba hardo jehan.

That person who abides by the path shown by the Prophet without
doubt, will never suffer grief in both the worlds.

Ba dunya o okba shavad ru sufid,
Bar Ayad ba del harcheh darad umid.

That person will go with (the white mouth) bright, cheerful face in
this world and in the world beyond, and whatever wishes of the heart
he will have will be fulfilled.


--- Page 359 ---

MONAAJAT IN PRAISE OF THE HOLY PROPHET ZARTOSHT 343

(13) Ba gitt hamisheh ziyad ba farin
Ba min6 ravad dar beheshte barin.

(13) Moreover, that person will lead his life with glory in this world, and
will attain the highest Heaven in the Spiritual World.

(14) Hazaran salamo hazaran sana,
Ze ma bad bar 4n shahe asfia.

(14) May there be a thousand salutations and thousand praises from us to
the Sovereign of the Righteous (i.e. to the Holy Prophet Zartosht)!

FARVARDIN Y ASHT TO BE RECITED ALONG WITH THE KARDAH OF
“STUM” IN THE SACRED MEMORY OF THE SOULS OF THE DEPARTED
ONES.

Pa name yazdin Ahura Mazda Khodae awazini, gorje khoreh
awazayad; Ardafravash berasad. Az hama gunah patet pashemanum; az
harvastin dushmata duzhukhta duzhvarshta, mem pa geti manid, oem
goft, oem kard, oem jast, oem bin bid ested. Az 4n gunah manashni
gavashni kunashni, tani ravani get! mmOani, okhe avakhsh pasheman
pasé gavashni pa patet hom. Khshnaothra Ahurahe Mazdao, taroidite
angrahe mainyéush; Haithyavarshtam hyat vasna ferashOtemem;
staomi ashem. Ashem Vohi 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaévé Ahura-tkaésh6o (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Ahurahe Mazdao
raévatd khvarenanguhatd, Ameshanam Spentanam, ashaonam fravashi-
nam, ughranam aiwithurandm, paoiry0-tkaéshanam fravashinam,
nabanazdishtanam fravashinam, khshnaothra yasnaicha vahmaicha
khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha, Yatha Ahi Vairy6o zaota fra-me mrite,
atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraoti. Ahurem
Mazdam raévantem khvarenanguhantem yazamaide; Amesha Spenta
hukhshathra hudhaongho yazamaide.

*“™Ashaunam vanguhish siirao spentéo fravashayd staomi zbayemi
ufyemi. Yazamaide nmanyao- visyao0o zantumao dakhyumaéo
Zarathushtrotemao. (2) Vispanamcha aongham paoiryanam
fravashinam idha yazamaide fravashim avam yam Ahurahe Mazdao,
mazishtamcha vahishtamcha  sraéshtamcha, khraozdishtamcha
khrathwishtamcha hukereptemamcha, ashat apanotemamcha.

(3) Ashaunam vanguhish sirao spentao fravashayd yazamaide; yao
Ameshanam Spentanam, khshaetanaim vereziddithranam, berezatam
aiwyamanam takhmanam Ahiiryanam, yoi aithyejanghd ashavand. (4)
Paoiryanam tkaéshanam paoiryandam sasnd-gisham, idha ashaonam

azn For the translation of the Karda of Stum, see my Khordeh Avesta Ba Maeni, pages 382-391.


--- Page 360 ---

344 KHORDEH AVESTA

ashaoninamcha ahimcha daénamcha_ baodhascha’_ urvanemcha
fravashimcha yazamaide, yoi ashai vaonare. Géush hudhadonghd
urvanem yazamaide.

(5) Yoi ashai vaonare. Gayehe Marethnd ashaonod fravashim
yazamaide. Zarathushtrahe Spitamahe idha ashaond  ashimcha
fravashimcha yazamaide. Kavdish Vishtaspahe ashaond fravashim
yazamaide.  Isatvastrahe Zarathushtrdish ashaond  fravashim
yazamaide. (6) Nabanazdishtanam idha ashaonam ashaoninamcha
ahimcha = daénamcha’- baodhascha’ urvanemcha __fravashimcha
yazamaide, yoi ashai vaonare, mat vispabyd ashaonibyo fravashibyd,
yao iririthusham ashaondm, yaoscha jvantam ashaonam, yaoscha
naram azatanam frashd-charethram Saoshyantam.

(7) Idha iristanadm urvand yazamaide yao ashaonam fravashayd.
Vispanam ahmya =nmdane- nabanazdishtanam para-iristanam
aéthrapaitinam aéthryanadm naram  nairindm idha  ashaonam
ashaoninam fravashayO yazamaide. (8) Vispanam aéthrapaitinam-
ashaondm fravashayO yazamaide. Vispanam aéthryanadm ashaonam
fravashayO yazamaide. Vispanim naram ashaonam _fravashayd
yazamaide. Vispanam nairinam ashaoninam fravashayo yazamaide.

(9) Vispanam aperenayukanam dahmod-keretanam ashaonaim
fravashayO yazamaide. Adakhyunamcha ashaonam _ fravashayo
yazamaide. Uzdakhyunamcha ashaonam fravashayd yazamaide. (10)
Naramcha ashaonam fravashayO yazamaide. Nairinamcha ashaoninam
fravashayO yazamaide. Vispao ashaunaim vanguhish sirdo spentao
fravashayO yazamaide, yao hacha Gayat Marethnat 4-saoshyantat
verethraghnat.

(To recite in baz) ““Humata hikhta hvarshta; humanashni,
hugavashni, hukunashni, in khshnuman Ardafravash berasad, nirang
pirozgar bad; khoreh beh dine Mazdayasnan rava bad andar haft
keshvar. Naim Cheshtihatar andar kim bad; hast sheherastan andar (the
name of the country in which the Kardah is recited should be named)
Sheherastan, pori firozi shadi o ramashni, ravan khoreh khojasteh
avaziin bad, avazintar bad khoreh khojasteh bad; in khshnuman
Ardafravash berasad, kera gah roz sheherlari khesh yazashne karde
hom, darun yashte hom, myazda hamiraenem yo kardeha pa ganje
Dadar Ahura Mazda rayOmand khorehmand Ameshaspandan berasad.
Aoj zor niru tagi amaévandih pirozgari in khshnuman Ardafravash
berasad. Az hama padiraftar bad. Emara panahi keredar niki
andakhtar, anai petyar dir avaz-dashtar, ayafta khvah bad. Kera digar
myazda hazar mard myazda shayam sakht ¢mara kam-ranjtar asantar

azo The portion from here up to “(Recite aloud)” being in Pazend should be recited in baz
(murmur).


--- Page 361 ---

FARVARDIN YASHT TO BE RECITED ALONG WITH THE KARDAH OF “STUM” IN THE SACRED MEMORY OF THE
SOULS OF THE DEPARTED ONES. 345

aint kard yak az m4 hazar padiraftar bad. Nam Cheshti anusheh ravan
ravani (the name of the person in whose memory the kardah is recited
should be taken here) aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani.

Zartosht Spitaman asho farohar aedar yad bad anusheh ravan
ravani. Gushtaspa Shah Lohoraspa Shah aedar yad bad anusheh ravan
ravani. Jamaspa Habub aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Ardae
Viraf Ardafravash aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Mubed Shapur
Mubed Sheheriar aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Mubed
Hormazdiar Ervad Ramyar aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani.
Mubed Neryosang Dhaval aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Hama
fravash ashoan aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani. Nam Cheshti
anusheh ravan ravani (the name of the person in whose memory the kardah
is recited should be taken here). Hama fravash ashoan aedar yad bad:
farmaeshne (the name of the person who orders to recite the kardah should
be taken) Mazdayasni berasad.

HamAafravash ashoan yo kardeha cheharum dehum siroz sal roz, az
Gayomard anda Soshyosh aedar yad bad. Hastan bidan bedan zadan
azadan, adehi uzdehi, dahme nar narik avarnae purnae, har ke avar in
zamin pairi behedini gudaran shud ast, hamafravash ashoan yo kardeha
az Gayomard anda Soshyos aedar yad bad. Ashoan fravash chiran,
fravash avarvizan, fravash pirozgar4n, fravash poryodakeshan, fravash
nabanazdeshtan, fravashe fravashay6, hamaé yo kardeha az Gayomard
anda Soshyos aedar yad bad. Ravane pedaran madaran jadagan
nyagan, farzandan paevandan parastaran nabanazdeshtan, fravash
ashoan yO kardeha az Gayomard anda Soshyos aedar yad bad. Hama
athornan, hama rathéshtaran, hama vastrydshan, hama hutokhshan,
hama fravash ashoan, hama yo kardeha az Gayomard anda Soshyos
aedar yad bad; hama fravash ashodn hafte keshvar zamin, arzahe
savahe, fradadafsh vidadafsh, vourubaresht vouruzaresht, khaniratha-
bami, kangadez ashoan varjam kardan ganjmanthra fravash ashoan
hama yo kardeha az Gayomard anda Soshyas aedar yad bad. Gorje
khoreh awazayad in khshnuman Ardafravash berasad. Nam cheshti
anusheh ravan ravani. (Name of the person in whose memory the kardah is
recited should be taken here) aedar yad bad anusheh ravan ravani;
hamafravash ashoan aedar yad bad; farmaeshne (the name of the person
who orders the recitation of the kardah should be taken) Mazdayasni
berasad. Hamkerfeh hama vehane haft keshvar zamin berasad. Az
hama gunah patet pashem4anum pa patet hom.

(Recite aloud) Vispao fravashay6 ashaunim yazamaide; ashaunim
vanguhish sirao spentao fravashay0d yazamaide. Vispe ashavana yazata
yazamaide.

(If the Gah be Havan, recite as under):


--- Page 362 ---

346 KHORDEH AVESTA

Havanim paiti ratum; Savanghaém visimcha paiti ratim.

(If the Gah be Rapithwan or Second Havan, recite as under):
Rapithwanem paiti ratim; fradat-fshaum zantumemcha paiti ratim.
(If the Gah be Uzirin, recite as under):

Uzayeirinem paiti ratim; fradat-virem dakhyumemcha paiti ratim.
(If the Gah be Aiwisruthrem, recite as under):

Aiwisruthremem aibigaim paiti ratim; fradat-vispam hujyaéitim
Zarathushtrotememcha paiti ratim.

(If the Gah be Ushahen, recite as under):
Ushahinem paiti ratim; berejim nmanimcha paiti ratiim.

Yenghe hatam Aat yesne paiti vangho,
Mazdao Ahuro vaétha ashat hacha,
yaonghamcha tanscha taoscha yazamaide.

(To recite in baz) Hormazd Khodae awazinie mardum, mardum
sardagan hama sardagan, hambayaste vehan, oem behedin mazda-
yasnan agahi Astavani neki rasanad aedin bad. (To recite aloud) Yatha
Ahi Vairya 2.

Yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha 4Afrinami, Ahurahe
Mazdao raévatd khvarenanguhatd, Ameshanam Spentanam, ashaonam
fravashinam ughranam aiwithiranam, paoiryd-tkaeshanam
fravashinam, nabanazdishtanam fravashinam. Ashem Vohii 3.

Fravarane Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish vidaevd Ahura-tkaesh6o (Gah
according to the period of the day) frasastayaécha. Ashaunam
fravashinam ughranam aiwithiranam paoiryd-tkaeshanam
fravashinam nabaénazdishtanam fravashinaim, khshnaothra yasnaicha
vahmaicha khshnaothraicha frasastayaécha, yatha Ahi Vairyd zaota
frame mrite, atha ratush ashatchit hacha fra ashava vidhvao mraotu.

(The entire portion from the first kardah of the Fravardin yasht, i.e. from
mraot Ahurd Mazdao Spitamdai Zarathushtrai, up to the end of kardah 31 of
the same yasht, ic. up to hacha ahmat-nmanat ahmakemcha
Mazdayasnanam) should be recited in full; then recite:-)

Yatha Ahi Vairyd 2; yasnemcha vahmemcha aojascha zavarecha
afrindmi ashaonam fravashindm ughranam aiwithiranam paoiryd-
tkaéshanam fravashinam, nabanazdishtanam fravashinim; Ashem
Vohi 1.

Ahmai raéshcha; Hazangrem; Jasa me avanghe Mazda; Kerfeh
Mozda.


--- Page 363 ---

THE FAMOUS KARDAH OF YATU ZI ZARATHUSHTRA OF THE HaFTAN YASHT. 347

THE FAMOUS KARDAH OF YATU Zi ZARATHUSHTRA OF THE HAFTAN
‘YASHT.

“(The word by word translation of the famous passage which begins
with the words, “Yatu zi Zarathushtra” in the Large Haftan yasht and Small
Haftan Yasht, was not given up to now in this book. It is now given below
along with the Avestan text:-)

(11) Yatu! z’ Zarathushtra* vanat' daév6> mashyd*. KO’ nmanahe®
badha’? Spitama’ Zarathushtra", vispa’ drukhsh® janaiti’’, vispa’
drukhsh" nashaiti!’ yatha'* haonaoiti!? aésham”’ vacham”'. (12) Aoi” te”
aoi* tanvo* dadhaiti’®, aoi?’ te’> athaurunem” janaiti**, athaurunem*!
yatha” rathaéshtarem®, vispano™ asrushtée* nashatanam”® aojangha’’.
Yo"? him” daste daranem‘!, ydi* hapta*® Amesha“ Spenta*
hukhshathra* hudhaongho” hamerethanamchit*. Daénam®” Mazda-
yasnim™, asp6-kehrpem*! apem* Mazdadhatam*®  ashaonim™
yazamaide®. (13) Atare® vitare’’ maibya® vitare® maibya™ vimraot®!
Zarathushtra”, atare® vitare“ maibyaschit® vitare® maibyaschit”
vimraot® Zarathushtra®; yat” vanghéush”) mananghod”; yat? aithye-
janghem™” vacham”™, fraspavaresh” fracha”  framerethwacha”®
frazathwacha”. (14) Satavata® satevata*! utavata® utevata® uta*
apabarentu® yatha® bastem®’ fravashanam*® daénam® Mazdayasnim”
nashatanam”! aojangha”. Ashem Vohi 1.

(11) O Zarathushtra*! the wizard! resembling a daeva-like* man® should
indeed’ be smitten*. O Spitama'® Zarathushtra''! Just as'* one would succeed
in the power’? of these” sacred-verses”’, (in the same way) one would surely’
kill’* all’? the drujas’? of the house’, nay would destroy’’ them all'*. Who’ (is
such)?

(12) This”, (druj) takes the control” of thy” body”; and owing to total**
disobedience** smites*® thy’® athravan-priest?? - as well as the warrior’,
through the agency of the force*’ of the destroyers**.

(He is the man desired in the above-mentioned paragraph 11) who”
against anyone whatsoever of the enemies“ (acts) as a shield*’ for them® (i.e.
for the priest and the warrior) - (it is they) who” (are) the seven*®
Ameshaspand*** wise and true rulers (good-ruling*’ and good wisdom*’)
(who) afford® (protection of their influences). We are in tune® with the
Mazda-worshipping” Religion® and with the holy™ water created by
Mazda’ like the shape of a horse?'.

1 en

(13) For my sake** Zarathushtra condemned®' “atare**-gunah” (sins of
commission) and “vitare’’- gunah” (sins of omission), (nay for my sake®
vitare-gunah”” (sins of omission); on account of me too® Zarathushtra®

56

azp Translator s Note: The rest of the text were not translated and explained by Ervad Kavasji
E. Kanga. These are translated by Ervad Phiroze Masani.


--- Page 364 ---

348 KHORDEH AVESTA

condemned® “Aatare-gunah®” (sins of omission), and “vitare-gunah™” (sins

of omission), nay for my sake alone®’ — “vitare-gunah®” (sins of omission);
which” (sins) (are) pertaining to Vohu-Manangh””, which” (sins) (are)
indestructible” amongst the sacred verses”> -

=99

(14) (A person like “yatu” and “daév6-mashy6”) through the power” of
the destroyers”! carries far away® as if*’ bound®’ the Mazda-worshipping”
religion® related to increases*’ hundredfold*® and hundred times®’,
continuously® and even continuously*."4

(In the same way, word by word translation of Kardah 19, paragraph 59,
of Behram yasht is given below.)

(59) Verethraghnem' Ahuradhatem’ yazamaide*. Asanem* sighiire*
chithrem® abare’ Ahurd* puthrd’ puthraongh6d” baévare-patayo",
amava” as’? verethrava" nama", verethrava’® 4s!’ amava'* nama”.

(59) We praise* Beheram’ (yazata) created by Ahura Mazda”. May Ahura
Mazda® grant’ (me) a sharp Chithra®, i.e. the seed weapon‘ - (so that) there
may arise progeny? and children’® possessed of ten thousand times
authority'', - (who) must be’? courageous” and victorious’®.

azq JHP note: Masani was a proponent of the “Khshnoomist” movement, considered heterodox
by many. His explanation reflects those teachings: (Explanation of Ervad Masani as regards the
above-mentioned Kardah). This Kardah which is known as “Yatu zi Zarthushtra” should be re-
cited seven times. In the Zoroastrian Religion is explained the Law of Vibrations producing ef-
ficacious effects of the recital of the Holy Spells and according to this Law of Vibrations the ef-
fect of this Kardah is most powerful and beneficial. Specifically, this Kardah is regarded as
most efficacious for resisting against the magic of any person like “yatu’”, “black magician”.
Owing to the entire “Fshusho-manthra” embodied in it, a lucid interpretation cannot be easily
comprehended by us by translating it word by word. But the explanation of this Kardah in short
is this: When the force of wickedness comes against that person who is most advanced in spir-
ituality, and who belongs to the position of either “athravan” or “Rathaeshtar”, owing to the law
of dualism, then, the “Stot” pertaining to seven Ameshaspand within the “Kehrpa” or the astral
body provide protection against it; i.e. If the Holy Spells which have been included into this
Kardah are recited continuously, there will be the defence of the “Kehrpa” of the person highly
advanced in spirituality. Many mysterious matters, especially “a-tare” are embodied in this
Karda; i.e. an attitude inclining more to sins of commission, known as “‘freh-bitth” in Pahlavi,
and “‘vi-tare” i.e. an attitude which keeps continuously further away from divine influences, i.e.
sins of omission, known as “aibi-btitih” in Pahlavi. These spells are given to save continuously
from two types of sins, which cause disturbance in the development of the soul in accordance
with the law of “mithra”. Remember that as a shield of powerful defence against the sins of
“mithra” possessed of magical effect and “a-tare” - excess and “vi-tare” - deficiency pertaining
to “manthra”, as well as for keeping continuously in the “kehrpa” vibrations, (i.e. vibration-col-
ours), this “Kardah” is most exalted and excellent. It will be helpful in maintaining the propor-
tion of righteousness within the reciter.
