

--- Page 1 ---



--- Page 2 ---



--- Page 3 ---



--- Page 4 ---



--- Page 5 ---



--- Page 6 ---



--- Page 7 ---



--- Page 8 ---



--- Page 9 ---



--- Page 10 ---



--- Page 11 ---



--- Page 12 ---



--- Page 13 ---



--- Page 14 ---



--- Page 15 ---



--- Page 16 ---



--- Page 17 ---



--- Page 18 ---



--- Page 19 ---



--- Page 20 ---



--- Page 21 ---



--- Page 22 ---



--- Page 23 ---



--- Page 24 ---



--- Page 25 ---



--- Page 26 ---



--- Page 27 ---



--- Page 28 ---



--- Page 29 ---

Never, O Lord, O Truth, and O Pure Mind, may we
provoke to anger. May we come to you with hymns
of praise, for you are the best to invoke in prayer.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.6

Thereupon spoke God, who pervades everything
with His wisdom: Is not a single powerful person or a
protector who is righteous known to you? Is this why
I made you the protector of all things created by me?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.8

May I think of You as first and last - the be all and
end all of everything - always. As the father of the
highest mind. May I behold You in my mind’s eye
as the true creator of truth and the Lord over the
actions of the living.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.13

These questions are asked openly or secretly. When
for a small act of violence one undergoes the highest
penance, this is observed by You clearly, along
with the truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.16

This is the true teaching of a teacher who is followed
correctly. You have power over those who plan to
menace me. ‘Therefore, I will restrain violent and
evil persons from hurting your devotees.


--- Page 30 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.7

Where are your devotees, O Lord, whose minds are
filled with understanding; who, in times of ill fortune
and trouble, teach us about our true inheritance
which liberates our minds from the thought of the
misery brought about by retribution? Nobody other
than You do I acknowledge. Therefore, protect
mankind through truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.3

Surely, the best will come to him who teaches us
about the path of righteousness, which leads to bliss,
both mental and physical, leading to the world of
reality where God dwells. May Your devotee, who
is wise and good, be one with You, O God.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.5

I have realised that You are holy, O Lord, when
I recognised that You were the first, even before
life came into being. You have ordained that all
words and deeds will bear fruit. Misery to those
who are evil, and blessings of well-being to those
who are good. Thus shall it be till the ultimate goal
of creation is reached.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.6

At which goal You stand, O Lord, with the holy
spirit, Your power and the Pure Mind, through all
of whom life advances along the path of truth. These


--- Page 31 ---

are pointed out by right-mindedness’s teaching — the
doing of Your will, which can be thwarted by no one.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.1

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How should your devotees worship you? Let
your assistant truth, O God, point out this to me -
until the revelations of the Pure Mind arrive to all
mankind.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.3

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Which Being, our Father, first created truth? Which
Being laid down the path of the sun and the stars?
Through which Being does the moon wax and wane
alternately? All this and other things I do wish to
know, O Lord.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.4

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Which Being supports the Earth and the other
worlds? Which Being created the waters and the
plants? Which Being moves the wind and dark
clouds? Which Being, O Lord, is the creator of the
Pure Mind?


--- Page 32 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.5

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Who created light and darkness? Who created sleep
and wakefulness? Who created dawn, day and night?
All these instruct the wise about life’s purpose.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.6

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

I will ask whether this is indeed true - right-
mindedness, working through good deeds,
increases truth. Right-Mindedness promises this
through Your power and through the Pure Mind.
For whom did you fashion this abundant and joy-
giving Mother Earth?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.7
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Who created Your precious power and right-
mindedness? Who, with his living breath, made
the son follow the father? Thus would I clearly
recognize You, O Lord, as the creator of the holy
spirit and everything else.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.4

And I will explain about the best there is in life.
Because of following the path of truth, God has
revealed it to me. He is the father of the active and
good mind and his daughter, right-mindedness,


--- Page 33 ---

makes us do good deeds. God, who is all-seeing, is
never deceived.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.6

And I will explain about the greatest of all,
praising His wisdom and truth. Through the holy
spirit may God listen to us. Through the Pure Mind
may I become devoted to Him. May He in His
wisdom guide me onwards to the highest.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.10

Him, through devotion to right-mindedness,
will I seek - who is forever known as the Lord
who is the great creator. For, through Truth and
the Pure Mind, He has promised, through His
power, perfection and immortality, will be given
to all persons, as also strength of character and life
renewed.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.9

Who is Your foremost devotee who will teach me
to regard You as worthy of worship - as holy judge
over our actions. And Truth has revealed You as
the creator of Mother Earth. I wish for truth and for
your pure mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.9

When will I know that You rule over all, O Lord,
and Truth, despite those who plot against it and


--- Page 34 ---

threaten me? Tell me truly and reveal this to me
through the Pure Mind. The saviour should know
what is in store for him.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.3

Let all those who do good deeds come together
to foster Mother Earth. God and Truth speak the
language of revelation that comes from the highest
mind - from the beginning have You been the
teacher.


--- Page 35 ---



--- Page 36 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.3

To You, O Truth, and Pure Mind, shall I compose
hymnsas never before, and unto the Lord, the Great
Creator, as well. Then, by Your limitless power, shall
right-mindedness increase which, when invoked,
comes to us to grant us perfect happiness.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.10

Do you, O Lord, Truth, and God’s power, grant
strength to him so that he can give us peace and
make Mother Earth a good place to live in? Him do
we accept as our first saviour.



--- Page 37 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.11

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How will right-mindedness penetrate those to
whom Your revelation is proclaimed? For this task
have I been sent as the first - all others who are a
sham do I regard with hostility?



--- Page 38 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.1

To You, O Lord, did Mother Earth complain:
Why did you create me in the first place? I am
surrounded by anger, rapine and violence, which
aggressively threaten me. For me, there is no
protector other than You. So, tell me who will
protect me effectively against this onslaught?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.2
Thereupon the creator of Mother Earth asked the
Absolute Truth:

Where is the protector for Mother Earth who can
zealously perform this task? Which powerful person
can repel such hatred and anger?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.3

To God, Absolute Truth, who binds all together,
replied:

No such one is known to me who can fight on the

side of the upright. Of all living persons he must be
very strong. I will try to respond as soon as possible.


--- Page 39 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.4

God bears in mind all prayers made to him - past,
present and future; those made by ordinary people
as well as the believers in many Gods. God is the
sole judge: so let God’s will be done.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.5

Therefore, may we with hands uplifted, receive
God's grace. Bountiful Mother Earth requests God
thus:

Never may harm come to those who are upright or
to their leader, though they be surrounded by evil
persons.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.6

Thereupon spoke God, who pervades everything
with His wisdom:

Is not a single powerful person or a protector, who
is righteous, known to you? Is this why I made you
the protector of all things created by me?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.7

Absolute Truth is created by the holy word of
sacrifice uttered by God. God gives all the good
things of Mother Earth to the holy protectors
because of their teaching of truth to mankind.
Who, O Pure Mind, do you have in mind? Who
will save mankind?


--- Page 40 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.8

The Pure Mind answers:

One such is known to me - somebody who listened
to our teaching - Zarathustra Spitama. About
God and truth is he willing to speak. Grant him,
therefore, the gift of eloquence.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.9

Mother Earth wailed:

How do I accept such feeble support - a cowardly
person - when I wanted a powerful Lord. When, if
ever, will I get effective help from a strong protector?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.10

Do you, O Lord, Truth, and God’s Power, grant
strength to him so that he can give us peace and
make Mother Earth a good place to live in. Him do
we accept as our first saviour.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.11

When will Truth, the Pure Mind, and God’s power
come to me? Please give recognition to the Magha
brotherhood, who will spread your teaching. Now

that help has arrived, we will serve you as protectors
of life on Earth.



--- Page 41 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.2

Blinded by the teachings of those who are evil, the
better path is not clearly in sight. Therefore, I have
come to you all as God’s appointed instructor.
God has sent me as an instructor to both good and

evil persons so that we may all live in accordance
with truth.



--- Page 42 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.6

Therefore, as invoker of Truth’s straight path, I pray
with the highest or loftiest motives. I invoke His
grace. That I may fulfill my role as the protector
as planned. Therefore, I wish a vision of God and
communication with Him.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.7

Come to me, O Best of All, unmistakably in your
own person, together with Truth and the Pure
Mind, in order that I may be heard beyond the
Magha brotherhood. May You clearly give to us the
duties we have to perform which are dedicated with
humble reverence to You.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.11

You are Almighty, O Lord, Right-Mindedness,
Truth, and God’s Power, and you all bless life. Listen
to me and take pity on me while apportioning just
desserts to all.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.14

Therefore, Zarathustra offers himself and his
upliftment, to God, and dedicates the first fruits
of his thought inspired by the loftiest motives, His
deeds of truth, and his words uttered according to
his conscience - in effect, his whole being.


--- Page 43 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.7

As holy have I recognized You, O Lord, when the
Pure Mind entered me and asked — Who are you?
Where do you belong? What daily signs are given to
allay doubts about oneself and one’s life?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.8

Iam in the first place Zarathustra, dedicated to good,
and the true adversary of evil, to the extent that I
can contain it. To the righteous, I will be a source
of strength and joy. In future, may I be gifted with
Your infinite power so long as I am your devotee, O
Lord, and sing hymns of praise to You.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.11

As holy indeed have I recognized You, O Lord,
when the Pure Mind entered me.

When I was first taught by Your revelation, my
faith in the goodness of mankind helps me in times
of difficulty and I do what I have been taught by you
— to be the best.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.8

Him do I seek to praise, in all humility. Indeed,
I have seen him with my mind’s eye. By good
thought, deed, and word, and by the knowledge
brought by the path of truth have I perceived God
Himself. Let us, therefore, offer songs of devotion
to him in the abode of song, where God dwells.


--- Page 44 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.9

When will I know that You rule over all, O Lord,
and Truth, even those who plot against and threaten
me? Tell me truly, and reveal this to me through the
Pure Mind. The saviour should know what is in
store for him.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas 53.1:

Zarathustra has been granted eternal life because
he followed the path of truth. Even those who
opposed him have now understood his teachings
and are following his faith in word and deed.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas 53.8:

All evil persons who have been deceived into being
evil shall chide themselves, but may our young
men and women live by these eternal truths, and
may peace descend upon our happy people. May
Zarathustra, the Greatest, lead us all again, for he
has surmounted death.



--- Page 45 ---



--- Page 46 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.11
When will Truth, the Pure Mind, and God’s power
come to me? Please give recognition to the Magha
brotherhood, who will spread your teaching. Now
that help has arrived, we will serve you as protectors
of life on earth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.1

To God pray all three grades of the Magha
brotherhood, as also the believers in many gods,


--- Page 47 ---

in the same way and just as earnestly. May the
brotherhood become your messengers to repel
those who spread duplicity.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.3

Whosoever unto the righteous is the best, whether
he be of any grade of the Magha brotherhood, or
helps with zeal the living, will be at one with truth,
and will dwell in the pastures of the Pure Mind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.4

Therefore, acting against my conscience and evil
intent, will I correct by prayer, O Lord. And from the
spiritually self-sufficient will I pray away perverse
thoughts; from the worker who spreads the faith
the envy of his evil relations; and from the friend
to mankind slanderers; and from Mother Earth,
the teacher of evil.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.1

To which land can I flee? They hold me apart from
my Magha brothers - evil rulers keep me away
from them. How do I carry out your mission, O
Lord?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.14

Zarathustra, who is loyal to Truth? Who will make
famous your great brotherhood? King Vistaspa
has ushered in this new era. You have made him



--- Page 48 ---

king in this kingdom which is well administered, O
Lord, so that I may deliver Your message which I
have received from the Pure Mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.7

Let each one listen to the Pure Mind and Truth,
O Lord - do thou, O Lord, bear witness to this -
so that the spiritually self-reliant and the friend
of mankind live according to Your law and set a
good example to the worker who spreads Your
message.

VOHU KSHATREM - YAS. 51.11

Who is the friend of Zarathustra? Who communes
with truth, and holy right-mindedness, and the
highest ideals — thus regarding himself as an upright
member of the Magha brotherhood?

VOHU KSHATREM - YAS. 51.15

The reward which Zarathustra has promised to the
Magha brotherhood comes from beyond - the house
of song which was first inhabited by God Himself, and
the blessings of Truth and the Pure Mind.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas 53. 7:

The reward of the Magha brotherhood awaits the
united couple. But should you choose to leave this
brotherhood, deluded by the evil spirit, your end
will surely be in grief and words of woe.



--- Page 49 ---



--- Page 50 ---



--- Page 51 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.1

To You, O Lord, did Mother Earth complain: Why
did you create me in the first place? Iam surrounded
by anger, rapine, and violence, which aggressively
threaten me. For me, there is no protector
other than You. So tell me, who will protect me
effectively against this onslaught?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.2

Thereupon the Creator of Mother Earth asked
Absolute Truth: Where is the protector for Mother
Earth who can zealously perform this task? Which
powerful person can repel such hatred and anger?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.6

The best will be the lot of the wise man who
speaks the truth —- words which bring perfection
and immortality in the realm of truth. Such is God’s
power, that with this thought, good intent will
increase from within.



--- Page 52 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.9

Yours has been right-mindedness and the wisdom
which created life, O God. Unto life have You
granted the choice of following the teachings of
a true protector or the wiles of a false so-called
protector.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.10

So, between these two, let the choice as Shepherd
be for a man who possesses truth, a promoter of
the best of intentions. Never, O Lord, may a wolf in
sheep’s clothing purport to spread Your message.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.19

Whoever listens to and thinks of truth becomes
wise and helps life. He will be eloquent in his speech
with words which are true. Through the blazing fire
of judgement will you assign the next dwelling place
to all of mankind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.1

In accord with divine principles do I act; these are
the laws governing life from the very beginning.
The teacher will act justly to both the righteous
and the unrighteous and weigh the admixture of
falsehood and truth in each.



--- Page 53 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.2

Whosoever frustrates evil by thought, word, or
deed, or instructs his companion to do good,
accomplishes life's purpose, out of love for God.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.6

Since You are such in reality, O Lord, Truth and
Pure Mind, guide me when doubts arise, at every
stage of life, so that your worshipper is free from
the load which ultimately weighs the soul down.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.2

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

The first thing in life is to strive for the best, to
lead another yearning soul to attain the best, for
such person, indeed, is holy through truth, and will
attain the goal of all mankind. This person is our
guardian spirit and life renewing friend, O Lord.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.16

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Which victor will protect all who exist through
his teachings? Clearly reveal to me the guide who
will give life a new direction. To Him grant pure-
mindedness and an active conscience, O Lord, and
to whomsoever else as well.


--- Page 54 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.3

When, O Lord, will there be a new dawn when truth
shall shine forth from all life, following the effective
teachings of wise saviours. To whose help this shall
come, together with the Pure Mind - I have chosen
You as the subject of my teaching.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.7

Who, O Lord, will protect me when evil persons
threaten me with violence? Who, other than Your
fire and the Pure Mind? When they both are at
work within me, truth prevails, O Lord. Declare this
clearly so that I may understand this philosophical
truth.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.3

This would be for those who understand the best
teaching - that which is taught by the wisdom of
truth. Holy and Wise are the teachers of that which
cannot be seen - they are Yours, O God, having the
Pure Mind’s wisdom.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.12

Such are the saviours of this land, who are guided
by the Pure Mind’s wisdom. Because of their deeds
of truth and their teachings of God and the spread
of the divine message, hatred will be vanquished.


--- Page 55 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.5

Questioning about all these as to how he should
advance life in truth, the protector, upright in his
deeds, acquires good insight through humility. He
is the true guide to those who are wise, bringing
them blessings.


--- Page 56 ---



--- Page 57 ---



--- Page 58 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.3

To God, Absolute Truth, who binds all together, and
is inimical to none, replied: No such one is known
to me who can fight on the side of the upright. Of
all living persons, must he be very strong. I will try
to respond as soon as possible.



--- Page 59 ---



--- Page 60 ---



--- Page 61 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.7

Grant, O Truth, the reward of what is the best that
the mind can achieve. O Right-Mindedness, grant
this to Vistaspa and to my people, through your
power, O Lord, so that your worshippers may carry
out your wishes.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.1
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How should your devotees worship you? Let your
assistant, Truth, O God, point out this to me - until
the revelations of the Pure Mind arrives to all
mankind.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.10

Him, through devotion to Right-Mindedness, will I
seek — who is forever known as the Lord who is the
Great Creator? For, through Truth and the Pure
Mind, He has promised that through His power,
perfection, and immortality will be given to all
persons, as also strength of character and life
renewed.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.6

She alone is our safe haven - the gifts of the Pure
Mind are strength of character and life renewed.


--- Page 62 ---

God, through Truth, has clothed her with vegetation,
which nourished life at the very beginning.

VOHU KSHATREM 7 - Yas. 51.7

Grant me, O Creator of Mother Earth, the waters
and plant life, immortality and perfection through
Your holiest spirit, O Lord. Grant me strength of
character and life renewed through the teachings
of the Pure Mind.


--- Page 63 ---



--- Page 64 ---



--- Page 65 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas.28.1

To Almighty God, I pray in all humility, with uplifted
hands which reach out for perfect happiness. This
prayer is, first of all, to the Good Spirit, which I
seek to emulate through deeds done for the love
of truth. These deeds are what brings wisdom, the
highest that the mind can attain. It is this wisdom
that Mother Earth needs most, so that peace can be
brought to her.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.16

O Lord, Zarathustra chooses for himself the way
of the Holy Spirit. May Truth incarnated uplift us
with her strength. May Right-Mindedness and Your
power, resplendent as the sun, bless deeds done
from good motives.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.1

By the holy spirit and best mind, by words and deeds
of truth, perfection and immortality are bestowed
by God, His power and Right-Mindedness.


--- Page 66 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.2

Thus, the best and the holiest spirit speaks words
of the highest wisdom. With Right-Mindedness
helping it does it toil, doing good deeds with both
its hands, inspired by the thought that God is the
Father of Truth.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.3

You are indeed the Father of the Holy Spirit -
you have fashioned our joyful Mother Earth for it,
and to protect it have you sent peace, and right-
mindedness, and the Pure Mind, when it asked
for help.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.4

Because of this spirit, the evil persons’ plans are
frustrated, O God - but not those of the righteous.
Only one who has little material wealth is inclined
to be righteous. But being rich and powerful, such
person is inclined to being evil.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.5

Through this holy spirit, O God, have You
promised the best to the righteous. The evil person
will get his just desserts removed from Your love,
because of his evil intent and bad deeds.


--- Page 67 ---



--- Page 68 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.5

On self-realization through wisdom, when will
I actually see the very embodiment of Truth and
the Pure Mind? The path to Almighty God is
obedience to His will. (This is self-realization.)
Through this excellent verse will wicked people, by
word of mouth, be taught to choose correctly.



--- Page 69 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.5

Therefore, do I invoke conscience, the best of
all, to reach our final goal, which is long life in
the security of the Pure Mind, having followed the
straight path of truth, which leads to where God
alone rules.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.14

Therefore, Zarathustra offers himself and_ his
upliftment to God, and dedicates the first fruits of
his thought inspired by the loftiest motives, His
deeds of truth, and his words uttered according to
his conscience — in effect, his whole being.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.12

And when You told me to follow truth to acquire
understanding, You did not tell me to do something
which will be unheeded by me. I will bestir within
myself, my conscience which will then bless me
with the accompaniment of great light. You award
both the sides with just dues.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.16

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Which victor will protect all who exist through
His teachings? Clearly reveal to me the guide who
will give life a new direction. To Him grant pure-
mindedness and an active conscience, O Lord, and
to whomsoever else as well.


--- Page 70 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.4

And worshipping you and praising you, O God,
with Truth and Pure Mind and Your power, may
he, who desires to hear Your revelation, listen to
Your devotees in the abode of song.


--- Page 71 ---



--- Page 72 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.12

Therefore, each loudly proclaims whatever he
wishes — whether it be false or true; whether it be
wise or foolish — with head and heart, his spirit
stands beside Right-Mindedness, questioning as
to how to resolve his doubts.



--- Page 73 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.9

Holy Right-Mindedness, bounteous and wise, is
ignored by those doing evil. They are ignorant of
Pure-Mindedness, too. From these, truth withdraws
completely, just as uncultured and evil persons
withdraw from good persons.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.10

Unto such, doing deeds out of pure motives, do
persons of good understanding speak about holy
Right-Mindedness, who gives true understanding
and puts persons on the path of truth. All of them
will come to You, O Lord, once they have knowledge
of Your power.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.6

At which goal You stand, O Lord, with the Holy
Spirit, Your Power, and the Pure Mind, through all
of whom life advances along the path of truth. These
are pointed out by Right-Mindedness’s teaching -
the doing of Your will, which can be thwarted by no
one.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.10
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Your revelation is best for all living beings, which
advances truth and life and guides aright our words
and deeds, O Right-Mindedness, so that my desire
to understand Your will, O Lord, is fulfilled.



--- Page 74 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.11

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How will Right-Mindedness penetrate those to
whom Your revelation is proclaimed? For this
task have I been sent as the first — all others who are
sham do I regard with hostility.

VOHU KSHATREM - YAS. 51.20

Of one accord are you all in granting us blessings,
O Truth, the Pure Mind, and the word of Right-
Mindedness. With humility will your worshipper
yearn for bliss, O God.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.21

That man is holy who is filled with Right-
Mindedness. Through his wisdom, words, deeds,
and way of thinking, he promotes truth. May God
give him the power of the Pure Mind - for this
highest blessing do I pray.



--- Page 75 ---



--- Page 76 ---



--- Page 77 ---



--- Page 78 ---



--- Page 79 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.1

To those who wish to hear, I shall speak of the two
created by God - this teaching is to instruct the wise.
I shall praise God and the Pure Mind, pray to Truth,

so that you all may grow spiritually to attain light.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.2

Listen with your ears most attentively. Consider,
clearly, what I have to say. Choose before deciding
- man for man, each for himself, before this great
new age is ushered in. Each one of you, awaken to
this message.



--- Page 80 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.3

Now, in the beginning there were two spirits. They
were twins (equal in all respects) and got on well
among themselves. In thought, word, and deed,
they reveal themselves as good and evil. Those who
are of greater understanding choose to be upright;
not so those who are of lesser understanding.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.4

In the beginning, when these two spirits worked
together, one fostered life and the other destroyed
it. So it will be: the worst to those who are evil, and
the best to those who are good.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.5

Of those two spirits, one chose to do its worst,
whereas the Holy Spirit chose to live by truth. The
Holy Spirit clothes itself in light imperishable and
pleases God by willingly doing good deeds from
good motives.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.6

Of the two, the believers in many gods chose
wrongly. They were deluded when they argued
among themselves concerning what is correct. They
chose to have the worst of motives combined with
deeds done in anger, which had baneful effects on
mankind.


--- Page 81 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.7

Unto such will come God’s power, a mind which
is pure, and truth. Right-Mindedness will grant
continued spiritual progress, and they will be
triumphant in the ordeal that is life - as if they have
successfully gone through molten lava unscathed.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.8

But when retribution comes to those who indulge
in violence, God’s judgment will be clearly
revealed. It is then that the lie will be delivered into
the hands of truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.9

Those who make life worth living for others have
real companionship with truth. Such persons are
clear-minded and free from doubt, and are able
to withstand falsehood whenever reason sways in

doubt.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.10

When the short-lived triumph of those who are
evil is destroyed, they will get their just desserts.
After this, they will reach the abode wherein dwell
the Pure Mind, God, and Truth, and they will
constantly strive to do good.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.11
If you understand these principles which God


--- Page 82 ---

has laid down for man - happiness and misery,
punishment of a long duration for those who are
evil, and upward progress for those who are good
— happiness will be your lot.



--- Page 83 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.1

Now will I explain - give me your ear and listen,

those who have come from nearby, and those who
have come from afar. And please try to understand
what I have to say and keep it clearly in mind. Never
again will the preacher of evil destroy life. He has



--- Page 84 ---

become evil and speaks evil because he has gone
astray and chosen to be evil.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.2

I will explain about the two spirits at life's beginning,
of whom the holy one spoke to the evil one thus:
Between us, neither thoughts nor teachings, nor
understanding, nor moral choice, nor words, nor
deeds, nor way of thinking, nor souls, are alike.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.3

I will explain the first thing that should be known
about life - this was revealed to me by God. Those
among you who do not put into practice these
hymns as I understand and speak them will only
land up in misery at the end of life.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.4

And I will explain about the best there is in life,
because of following the path of truth, God has
revealed it to me. He is the Father of the active and
good mind and his daughter, Right-Mindedness,
makes us do good deeds. God, who is all-seeing, is
never deceived.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.5

I will explain what the holiest has revealed to me.
What He says is best for mortals to hear. Those
who obey and revere it, will attain perfection and


--- Page 85 ---

immortality, and through deeds done from the
loftiest motives, God Himself.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.6

And I will explain about the greatest of all, praising
His wisdom and truth. Through the holy spirit, may
God listen to us. Through the Pure Mind, may I
become devoted to Him. May He in His wisdom
guide me onwards to the highest.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.7

To all seekers of salvation, past, present, and future,
I have this to say: the soul of the righteous will
be victorious and will gain immortality. Ever
renewed are times of trouble for those who are
evil. This is sent by God through His power.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.8

Him do I seek to praise, in all humility. Indeed, [have
seen him with my mind’s eye. By good thought,
deed, and word, and by knowledge brought by the
path of truth, have I perceived God Himself. Let
us, therefore, offer songs of devotion to him in the
abode of song where God dwells.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.9

God and the Pure Mind do I seek to worship, who,
in his plan, has made for us both good and, its
opposite, evil. God’s power has made us serve our


--- Page 86 ---

human flock so that they advance to the highest
truth and wisdom.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.10

Him, through devotion to Right-Mindedness, will
I seek — who is forever known as the Lord who is
the Great Creator. For, through Truth and the Pure
Mind, He has promised that His power, perfection,
and immortality will be given to all persons, as
also strength of character and life renewed.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.11

Who, in the future, opposes ‘the gods’ and their
followers; who despises them and opposes them,
they being so different from Him; and he who thinks
with reverence of Him, is a saviour, a wise father,
a holy thinker, a friend, a brother, and a father, O
Lord.



--- Page 87 ---



--- Page 88 ---



--- Page 89 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.9

Yours has been right-mindedness and the wisdom
which created life, O God. Unto life have You
granted the choice of following the teachings of
a true protector or the wiles of a false so-called
protector.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.11

From the beginning, O Lord, You created life and
thought to minds of understanding. You created
upliftment for mankind - after all, deeds, teachings,
and wills are a matter of individual choice.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.12

Therefore, each loudly proclaims whatever he
wishes - whether it be false or true; whether it
be wise or foolish — with head and heart, his spirit



--- Page 90 ---

stands beside Right-Mindedness, questioning as to
how to resolve his doubts.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.17

Which of the two paths do either the righteous
or unrighteous choose as the better one? Let the
enlightened person explain this to the man
of good understanding. Let the man of poor
understanding not lead us astray. Do You, O God,
instruct us about the purity of the mind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.12

What is Your law, Your will, concerning Your
worship. Speak to me clearly, O Lord, so that the
blessings of rectitude come upon us. Lead us onto
the path of truth and self-realization through the
pure mind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.13

That path, O Lord, which You pointed out to
me - the creed of all saviours - that every good
deed inspired by lofty motives alone goes far.
This teaching is for the clear-sighted, leading to the
ultimate reward which you will grant.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.5

I have realized that You are holy, O Lord, when I
recognized that You were the first, even before life
came into being. You have ordained that all words


--- Page 91 ---

and deeds will bear fruit. Misery to those who are
evil, and the blessings of well-being to those who
are good. Thus shall it be till the ultimate goal of
creation is reached.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.12

And when you told me to follow truth to acquire
understanding, you did not tell me to do
something which will be unheeded by me. I will
bestir within myself my conscience, which will then
bless me with the accompaniment of great light.
You award both the sides with their just dues.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.15

As holy indeed have I recognized You, O Lord,
when the Pure Mind entered me and said that
silent meditation is good for spiritual growth.
Never should any person try to placate evil persons,
for, they will always regard the righteous as their
enemies.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.10
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Your revelation is best for all living beings, which
advances truth and life and guides aright our words
and deeds, O Right-Mindedness, so that my desire
to understand your will, O Lord, is fulfilled.


--- Page 92 ---

MorAL TEACHINGS 91

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.14

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How shall I deliver the lie into the hands of Truth?
How will I overthrow the lie by teaching Your holy
word? How do I bring complete frustration of the
plans of those who are evil? How do I get them into
trouble and get them to be hated?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.4

Evil persons all around us thwart the righteous
from helping Life. These persons are enemies of
life as shown by their actions. Whosoever opposes
them with all his life and strength, O Lord, is a
helper along the paths of holy wisdom.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.5

Whoever, being in a position of strength, receives
any person in kindness or in friendship, and
whoever receives anybody because he is a follower
of Your revelation, is blessed; even if such a person,
being righteous, receives an evil person, he should
teach him the path to salvation to save him from
destruction, O Lord.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.6

But, whoever, being able to do so, does not do so,
shall himself be ensnared by evil. Because he who is
good to those who are evil is himself evil. And he


--- Page 93 ---

who befriends the righteous is himself righteous.
This is your law ever since you first created us.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.7

Who, O Lord, will protect me when evil persons
threaten me with violence; who, other than Your
fire and the Pure Mind? When they both are at
work within me, truth prevails, O Lord. Declare this
clearly so that I may understand this philosophical
truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.8

Whoever is violent in life, his deeds of flaming
hate will not touch me but will recoil on him, this
which keeps him from the good life, but not from
hateful evil ways.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.15

The Haecat-aspa and Spitama family do I speak to, so
that you may discriminate between understanding
and ignorance. Through deeds of truth will you
march forward in accord with God's primeval law.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.17

I have told you that action, not inaction, is best,
O Wise Jamaspa. With your conscience aroused,
do you seek to worship - you will discriminate
between understanding and ignorance. God and
Truth are our wonderful protectors.


--- Page 94 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.4

Whosoever makes his mind better or worse, his
words and deeds show his way of thinking. He
chooses for himself — at the end, in your wisdom,
will he stand apart (depending on the choice made).

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.5

But he, O Lord, who, through earnest desire and
zeal, links his way of thinking with the Pure Mind
— each such applies right-mindedness and grows
wise by following the truth - all such will dwell
under Your rule, O Lord.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.1

God's power is great. It comes as a reward to those
who are dedicated and eager to serve the cause of
truth. By doing deeds of truth will one reach the
highest — for that alone will I strive now and always.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.4

Which shepherd will look after your worshipper?
When will compassion take over? When will
truth take over? And when will right-mindedness
do the same? Where is the highest mind and Your
power, O God?

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.6

Whosoever proves himself to be better than good,
thus fulfilling life's purpose, will be helped by God’s


--- Page 95 ---

power. But it shall be worse than bad for him who
does not do so at the final end of life.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.19

Therefore, that man, O Maidyo-Manha, shall
dedicate to Him the realization of self. Whoever
wishes to understand the meaning of life is better
able to demonstrate God’s laws through doing
good deeds.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas 53.5:

These words are spoken to young girls who are
getting married and to their young men - bring the
Pure Mind down to your own minds, and let each
one strive to surpass the other in truth and high-
mindedness, which will surely bring rich rewards.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.5

On self-realization through wisdom, when will
I actually see the very embodiment of Truth and


--- Page 96 ---

the Pure Mind? The path to the Almighty God is
obedience to His will. (This is self-realization.)
Through this excellent verse will wicked people,
by word of mouth, be taught to choose correctly.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.3

You give to us fire in spirit and bliss, promised to
all who follow truth, so that those who can discern
correctly are given your divine revelation. Declare
this revelation from your own mouth so that all
the living may choose aright.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.12

Among the descendants and progeny of the
Turanians, there will emerge the strong Fryana
who, through right-mindedness, zealously helps
the living. He will help them to reach the Pure
Mind and bliss, which God will grant.



--- Page 97 ---



--- Page 98 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.3

You give to us fire in spirit and bliss, promised to
all who follow truth, so that those who can discern

correctly are given your divine revelation. Declare



--- Page 99 ---

this revelation from your own mouth so that all the
living may choose aright.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.19

Whoever listens to and thinks of Truth becomes wise
and helps life. He will be eloquent in his speech with
words which are true. Through the blazing fire of
judgement will you assign the next dwelling place
to all of mankind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.4

And for Your fire, O Lord, mighty through truth,
do we yearn; powerful and giving clear help to
those who are constantly faithful. But, O God, the
fire sees through those who are unfaithful to You.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.4

May I recognize You as holy and powerful, O Lord,
who, with a mere wave of the hand, dost fulfil our
longings. You give both the good and the evil their
just desserts. Through Your blazing fire, mighty
with truth, will mental strength come to me.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.9

As holy, indeed, have I recognized Thee, O Lord,
when the Pure Mind entered me and asked: To
whom should I pay homage? Henceforth, I will pay
homage to Fire with all humility. And I will live by
truth, which is my own desire.



--- Page 100 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.7

Who, O Lord, will protect me when evil persons
threaten me with violence, who, other than Your
fire and the Pure Mind. When they both are at
work within me, truth prevails, O Lord. Declare this
clearly so that I may understand this philosophical
truth.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.6

These things are given by the holy spirit to us, O
God - through fire shall be determined the just
dues of both parties. When right-mindedness and
truth increase, many seekers will choose aright.

VOHU KSHATREM - YAS. 51.9

The just desserts which are given to both sides
by your blazing fire, O God, through the molten
metal test - may that grant us spiritual guidance.
Frustrated will be those who are evil and blessed
those who are good.



--- Page 101 ---



--- Page 102 ---



--- Page 103 ---



--- Page 104 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.6

Of the two, the believers in many gods chose
wrongly. They were deluded when they argued
among themselves concerning what is correct. They
chose to have the worst of motives combined with
deeds done in anger, which had baneful effects on
mankind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.3

But all you believers in many gods are clearly from
the evil spirit, and so are those who greatly honour
you. Among you are liars, self-centered people,
and even those who are duplicitous, and men
without conscience.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.4

And so, you have brought about a situation where
men doing the worst are called beloved of ‘the gods:
They have moved away from high-mindedness,
God’s wisdom, and strayed from the path of truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.8

Among these violent persons was Vivanhuso
and Yima, who, desiring to placate mankind,
illumined what is material instead of what is
spiritual on Earth. From persons such as these may
I stand apart on the Day of Judgement.


--- Page 105 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.9

The false teacher distorts the scriptures, and
through his teachings corrupts life. He removes
from us our real desire: the precious realization
of high-mindedness. I have spoken out what is in
my mind and appeal to You and to Truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.10

Such person distorts the scriptures when he says
that it is the worst to be outdoors and in the sun.
He makes the good follow evil. He hurls weapons
against the righteous and poisons our habitat.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.11

Persons like this corrupt life. They regard as great
evil lords and their evil ladies. They deprive us
of our true inheritance - the best that truth has to
offer. They distract the mind, O God.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.12

Through such teachings they turn mankind away
from doing the best deeds. For such as these, God
decrees retribution. They corrupt life with their
glib words. Grehma prefers to run after untruth
instead of the truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.13

Whatever power this Grehma hopes to win in the
worst mind’s abode, he will ultimately destroy


--- Page 106 ---

himself. He will then desire to know what is God’s
real message. But I will watch over his threats to
those who are truthful.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.14

Grehma and evil kings direct their energies,
since days of yore, to ensnare good people. They
approach evil persons for help, and doom Mother
Earth to death in the hope that they are invincible.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.15

Thus are brought to ruin the plans of evil priests
and evil kings. They are unfit to rule over persons
who will ultimately be carried into the domain of
the Pure Mind.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.20

How, O Lord, have the followers of polytheism
become so powerful? This do I ask: those who are
self-centered have delivered Mother Earth to
wrath and continuous wailing, like the priests
of old and evil rulers, who do not advance and
increase the cause of truth.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.10

When, O Lord, will there be men who will come to
spread the faith? When will this infatuation with piss
be eradicated, through which evil priests and wicked
rulers of evil intent dupe people in this place?


--- Page 107 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.1

Bendva has always resisted me greatly. I wish to win
him over from his evil ways, O Lord. In Your mercy,
give me the reward of defeating him by telling him
about the revelations of the Pure Mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.2

Indeed, Bendva makes me anxious. His evil
teachings and duplicity separates him from the
truth. Never does he commune with the holy Right-
Mindedness or the Pure Mind, O Lord.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.3

God has decreed the teaching that truth will
prevail and untruth will be neutralized. So, choose
carefully. Therefore, would I ask for association
with the Pure Mind and prohibit association with
all those who are wicked.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.4

Evil persons increase hatred and cruelty with their
speech - sham protectors, the wolves among
shepherds. Those who perpetrate evil don't have
any desire to do good deeds. Such men create
false Gods and evil ways of thinking.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.10

And the man who seeks to destroy contrary to these
laws, O God, is himself the child of the lie. All such


--- Page 108 ---

are of poor understanding. For my people will I
invoke Truth to come to us with its best blessings.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.14

Neither to God’s laws nor to man’s do the priests
listen with reverence. They deceive good persons.
Through their deeds and teachings will they be
consigned to the abode of woe/misery.


--- Page 109 ---



--- Page 110 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.7

Unto such will come God’s power and truth, a
mind which is pure. Right-Mindedness will grant
continued spiritual progress, and they will be
triumphant in the ordeal that is life - as if they have
successfully gone through molten lava unscathed.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.7

These violent persons do not understand the
Herculean effort required to tread the path of truth,


--- Page 111 ---

which is taught by life’s molten metal test. You
know best, O Lord, what fate is in store for them.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.10

So, do You give to me truth, for whom I yearn,

accompanied by right-mindedness. You question
mankind and test us - passing the test makes us
strong, so that tested by You, mankind is made
strong.



--- Page 112 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.8

But when retribution comes to those who indulge
in violence, God’s judgment will be clearly
revealed. It is then that the lie will be delivered into
the hands of truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.10

When the short-lived triumph of those who are
evil is destroyed, they will get their just desserts.
After this, they will reach the abode wherein dwells
the Pure Mind, God, and Truth, and they will
constantly strive to do good.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.11

If you understand these principles which God
has laid down for man - happiness and misery -
punishment of a long duration for those who are
evil, and upward progress for those who are good
— happiness will be your lot.


--- Page 113 ---

AHUNAVAITI —-Yas. 31.14

This do I ask You, O Lord:

How was it in the past and how will it be in the
future? How have you noted the wishes of the
righteous and those of the unrighteous, and how
will you deal with them once their accounts are
closed?

AHUNAVAITI -Yas. 31.15

I ask this: What is the punishment for those who
advance the power of evil-doers, O Lord; those who
find nothing better than to injure the protector who
opposes evil, and to injure his human flock?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.20

Whoever follows those who are righteous will
abide in light. But to long ages of darkness, and
words of misery, will the evil person lead himself,
thanks to his way of thinking and his deeds.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.8

Among these violent persons were Vivanhuso and
Yima, who, desiring to placate mankind, illumined
what is material instead of what is spiritual on Earth.
From persons such as these may I stand apart on
the Day of Judgement.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.11
You are Almighty, O Lord, Right-Mindedness,


--- Page 114 ---

Truth, and God’s Power, and you all bless life. Listen
to me and take pity on me while apportioning just
desserts to all.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.13

That path, O Lord, which You pointed out to me -
the creed of all saviours - that every good deed
inspired by lofty motives alone goes far. This
teaching is for the clear-sighted, leading to the
ultimate reward which you will grant.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.14

That reward, O Lord, worth having, is granting
spiritual upliftment to those in the flesh for
deeds done from a pure mind. Those who serve
our abundant Mother Earth - through Your power
and wisdom, O Lord, will do Your will - and gain
fulfilment by the tasks of truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.4

May I recognize You as holy and powerful, O Lord,
who, with a mere wave of the hand, dost fulfil our
longings. You give both the good and the evil their
just desserts. Through Your blazing fire, mighty
with truth, will mental strength come to me.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.12

And when you told me to follow truth to acquire
understanding, you did not tell me to do something



--- Page 115 ---

myself my conscience, which will then bless me
with the accompaniment of great light. You award
both the sides with their just dues.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.19
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

What happens to those who do not reward persons
who speak the truth? What is their punishment at
present? I know what will happen to them at the
end.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.7

To all seekers of salvation, past, present, and future,
I have this to say: The soul of the righteous will
be victorious and will gain immortality. Ever
renewed are times of trouble for those who are
evil. This is sent by God through His power.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.11

Through their power, priests and kings would destroy
mankind through their evil ways. But their own
conscience and thought shall trouble them when they
come near to the bridge of the separator. Through
all time will they live in the abode of misery.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.19

Whoever will accomplish through truth and his will
this complete renovation on Earth for Zarathustra,



--- Page 116 ---

to him will be given the reward of eternal
life, together with all that he desires from our
bountiful Mother Earth. All this You did reveal to
me, O Lord, the Wisest.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.5

Through this holy spirit, O God, have you promised
the best to the righteous. The evil person will get
his just desserts removed from Your love, because
of his evil intent and bad deeds.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.1

Since, on Judgement Day truth triumphs over
untruth - when a person attains immortality,
which has been said to be a delusion — then will the
devotees of many gods and other people who will
witness this increase their devotion to You, O Lord.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.2

Reveal to me what You know, O Lord; when
retribution takes over in the life beyond. Whether
truth conquers untruth, O Lord. That would indeed
be the grand finale of life.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.5

From beyond, O Lord, and Truth, may I sing that
which is revealed to me - your joy-giving hymns.
You can help us with a wave of the hand (which I
can see clearly) which will lead us to light.


--- Page 117 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.11

I am your staunch worshipper, and will always be,
O Lord, as long as I have the will and the strength.
Life’s laws are accomplished through the Pure
Mind, so that in accord with Your will, the
renovation of mankind is achieved.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.12

Not satisfactory to me, Zarathustra, is the smooth
passage of evil kings through this world. Because,
spiritual growth is attained by those who, with
ardent fervour, toil for it.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.13

Thus, do the evil corrupt upright and truthful
ways of thinking. Their souls will chide them and
send them, when on the path of the separator, to
misery. For this they are themselves to blame, as by
their own words and deeds they have strayed from
the path of truth.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.14

Neither to God’s laws nor to man’s do the priests
listen with reverence. They deceive good persons.
Through their deeds and teachings will they be
consigned to the abode of woe/misery.



--- Page 118 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.15

The reward which Zarathustra has promised to
the Magha brotherhood comes from beyond - the
house of song which was first inhabited by God
Himself, and the blessings of Truth and the Pure
Mind.


--- Page 119 ---



--- Page 120 ---



--- Page 121 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.6

The best will be the lot of the wise man who speaks
the truth - words which bring perfection and
immortality in the realm of truth. Such is God’s
power that with this thought good intent will
increase from within.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.21

God will grant perfection and immortality, and
through his wholeness, truth, God’s power, and
pure-mindedness, all of which sustain life, to the
one who is his friend in spirit and in action.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.5

Thus, did you cheat mankind of a good life on
earth and immortality in the future. The evil spirit
deceived you into bad thought, word, and deed
when it taught you that evil will reign supreme.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.8

Carefully, see for yourself my purpose which I pursue
with a good motive. Worship is of only You, though
I speak words of praise for Truth as well. Grant us
the blessing of perfection and immortality once
life changes our direction to the path of good.



--- Page 122 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.9

These two spiritual attainments, O Lord, are
mighty promoters of truth - they bring light and
strength. May the Pure Mind bring their assistance
to us from afar — they whose souls work as one.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.1

The path of truth - words, deeds, and worship -
brings immortality, and through Your power, O
God, perfection. May we bring this to mankind by
propagating this most zealously, O Lord.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.11

And both perfection and immortality lead
onwards to light and display the power of the
Pure Mind. Truth and right-mindedness increase
strength of character and make life take on a new
meaning. Through the working of these will your
opponents be vanquished.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.17

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How do [ attain the goal set by You, O Lord - how do
I become your companion, so that I may convince
mankind about our common future, namely
perfection and immortality, attained through
Your holy word, which is our best guide owing to
its truth?



--- Page 123 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.18
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Howshall] earn through truth that reward: material

wealth in the form of ten mares, led by a stallion,
and a camel, so that I may bring perfection and
immortality to mankind?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.2

I know why I am helpless - I have a small following
because I am a man of few possessions. Please
consider this fact carefully, O Lord. I wish for the
bliss that one friend gives to the other - teach me
about the might of the Pure Mind through truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.5

I will explain what the Holiest has revealed to me;
what He says is best for mortals to hear. Those
who obey and revere it will attain perfection and
immortality and through deeds done from the
loftiest motives, God Himself.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.10

Him, through devotion to Right-Mindedness, will
I seek — who is forever known as the Lord who is
the Great Creator. For, through Truth and the
Pure Mind, He has promised that through His
power, perfection and immortality will be given
to all persons, as also strength of character and
life renewed.


--- Page 124 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.1

By the holy spirit and best mind, by words and deeds
of truth, perfection and immortality are bestowed
by God, His power, and right-mindedness.


--- Page 125 ---



--- Page 126 ---

AHUNAVAITI 1.7 - Yas. 29.7

Absolute Truth is created by the holy word of
sacrifice uttered by God. God gives all the good
things of Mother Earth to the holy protectors
because of their teaching of truth to mankind. Who,
O Pure Mind, do you have in mind, who will save
mankind?



--- Page 127 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.7

Who through that first word brought light down
to us from heavenly light? Who through his
wisdom is the creator of truth? The upholder of
the Highest (mentally). That light do You brighten
within us, which has otherwise remained dormant
till now.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.2

To You do we turn our minds, full of the revelations
of the Pure Mind and the deeds of holy men, whose
souls are at one with truth. Lead us near You, O
Lord, worshipping You by singing Your praises.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.17

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How do [attain the goal set by You, O Lord? How do
I become your companion, so that I may convince
mankind about our common future, namely
perfection and immortality, attained through Your
holy word, which is our best guide owing to its
truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.5

I will explain what the Holiest has revealed to me.
What He says is best for mortals to hear. Those
who obey and revere it will attain perfection and
immortality and through deeds done from the
loftiest motives, God Himself.


--- Page 128 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - YAS. 51.8

Your message will I preach - this should be
proclaimed only to those with understanding.
Misery will come to those who are evil - and
happiness to those who cling to truth. He who
spreads this word to those who understand will be

happy.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.10

You know those who are truthful, wise, and upright,
O Lord. Fulfil their desires, for I know that prayers
by such devout persons to further goodness will
not remain unanswered by you.



--- Page 129 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.11

So, through prayer may I be reminded of truth
and high-mindedness forever. Please tell me
Yourself, O Lord, (through Your own mouth) how
life first came into being.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.4

God bears in mind all prayers made to Him, past,
present, and future; those made by ordinary people
as well as the believers in many gods. God is the sole
judge; so let God’s will be done.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.1

To God pray all three grades of the Magha
brotherhood, as also the believers in many
gods, in the same way and as earnestly. May the
brotherhood become your messengers to repel
those who spread duplicity.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.12

Unfold Yourself within me, O Lord. Grant me the
strength of character through right-mindedness.
Through the holiest spirit, O Lord, grant me
goodness as a reward for prayer. Grant me a life
full of vigour through truth, and may the Pure Mind
look after me.



--- Page 130 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.12

What help will come to Your worshipper? What
help will come to Zarathustra from the Pure Mind?
I would sing hymns to please you, O Lord, asking
for that which is best.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.4

And worshipping You and praising You, O God,
with Truth and Pure Mind and Your power, may he
who desires to hear Your revelation listen to Your
devotees in the abode of song.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.5

From beyond, O Lord, and Truth, may I sing that
which is revealed to me - your joy giving hymns.
You can help us with a wave of the hand (which I
can see clearly) which will lead us to light.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.6

I, Zarathustra, will sing these uplifting hymns, O
Lord, befriended by Truth, in all humility. May the
Creator of Wisdom always guide my tongue - may
he teach me and guide me through the Pure Mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.7

Lead me to the path to adore you, O Lord, Truth
and the mighty Pure Mind, so that leading us, you
become our helpers.


--- Page 131 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.8

Ever with chants which well up to You from
within, may I reach You with hands uplifted, O
Lord. As Your humble devotee, may I reach Truth
and the great wisdom of the Pure Mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.9

With these hymns of praise may I come to you,
O Lord, O Truth, and through deeds, to the Pure
Mind when I have fully achieved all I have set out to
do. I yearn to become the possessor of Your wisdom.


--- Page 132 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.13

Give me bliss, make me far-seeing and reveal
to me Your incomparable gifts - Your power,
and the blessings of the Pure Mind. O Holy Right-

Mindedness, teach us clearly as to how truth guides

our way of thinking.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.5

Declare what is true unto me so that I may decide
as to what is better for me. That I may know this
through the pure mind and feel exalted in whatever
good may come to me - whether it comes or does
not come.



--- Page 133 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.1

To the Almighty God, I pray in all humility, with
uplifted hands which reach out for perfect happiness.
This prayer is, first of all, to the Good Spirit, which
I seek to emulate through deeds done for the love
of truth. These deeds are what bring wisdom, the
highest that the mind can attain. It is this wisdom
that Mother Earth needs the most so that peace can
be brought to her.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.12
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Who will I associate with - the righteous or those
who are evil? On which side am I - the victim or
the perpetrator of evil? The doer of evil sets himself
against truth and its rewards - is it not that such
person as this thinks not aright?

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.10

And this, O Lord, will I find in Your abode, in Your
great dominion — the Pure Mind, and the souls of
the righteous, who, filled with humility and the
desire to be right-minded, look kindly on mankind
in support.



--- Page 134 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.5

Questioning about all these as to how he should
advance life in truth, the Protector, upright in his
deeds, acquires good insight through humility.
He is the true guide to those who are wise, bringing
them blessings.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.15

As holy indeed have I recognized You, O Lord,
when the Pure Mind entered me and said that
silent meditation is good for spiritual growth.
Never should any person try to placate evil persons
for they will always regard the righteous as their

enemies.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.7

These violent persons do not understand the
Herculean effort required to tread the path of
truth, which is taught by life’s molten metal test. You
know best, O Lord, what fate is in store for them.



--- Page 135 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.6

Thus deluded, a complete sinner might appear
to succeed and become famous. But God, who
remembers all, is aware of his real worth - for verily
Truth, High-Mindedness, and God’s power, all of
which instruct us, shall prevail.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.11

Persons like this corrupt life. They regard as great
evil lords and their evil ladies. They deprive us
of our true inheritance - the best that truth has to
offer. They distract the mind, O God.

AHUNAVAITI -Yas. 34.5

How great is Your power, and my wish to do good
deeds, so that I may be with You, O Lord, Truth
and Pure Mind. In order to protect those in need,
we speak of You as above all others and apart from
‘other Gods’ and wicked men.



--- Page 136 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.8

Of those persons who do good are evil persons who
are afraid of them - but they are harmful to many.
Being powerful, they oppress mankind, defying
Your law, O God. Those who stray from the path of
truth are far away from the Pure Mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.4

Because of this spirit, the evil persons’ plans are
frustrated, O God - but not those of the righteous.
Only one who has little material wealth is inclined
to be righteous. But being rich and powerful, such
person is inclined to being evil.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas 53.9:

Being slaves to their own passions, those who are evil
are filled with hatred, and struggle with themselves.
They hate those who are good. Who will oppose
such persons with everything at his command? O
Lord, it is through Your power that You give to
the righteous meek the ultimate reward.


--- Page 137 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.18

Let not any of you listen to the words and teachings
of those who are evil. Because such persons make
this earth a miserable place. It is only when such
persons come to kill you that you can resist their
violence with violence.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.7

Keep hatred far away and steel yourselves against
violence, those of you who wish to cling onto the
best wisdom. To increase truth, be in the company
of holy men, who will lead such persons to Your
abode, O Lord.



--- Page 138 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas.28.1

To Almighty God, I pray in all humility, with uplifted
hands, which reach out for perfect happiness. This
prayer is first of all to the Good Spirit, which I seek
to emulate through deeds done for the love of truth.
These deeds are what bring wisdom, the highest that
the mind can attain. It is this wisdom that Mother

Earth needs most so that peace can be brought to
her.



--- Page 139 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.1

To those who wish to hear, I shall speak of the two
created by God - this teaching is to instruct the
wise. I shall praise God and the Pure Mind, pray
to Truth, so that you all may grow spiritually to
attain light.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.11

If you understand these principles which God has
laid down for man - happiness and misery, and
punishment of a long duration for those who are
evil, and upward progress for those who are good -
happiness will be your lot.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.7

Who, through that first word, brought light
down to us from heavenly light? Who, through
his wisdom is the creator of truth? The upholder of
the Highest (mentally). That light do You brighten
within us, which has otherwise remained dormant
till now.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.20

Whoever follows those who are righteous will
abide in light. But to long ages of darkness and
words of misery, will the evil person lead himself,
thanks to his way of thinking and his deeds.


--- Page 140 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.3

Whatever is due to You, O Lord, and to Truth, will
I give with all humility. All lives which, with Your
power, promote the Pure Mind, and can be seen
as good (in realms far away from Earth) have bliss
forever when living with God.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.11

And both perfection and immortality lead
onwards to light and display the power of the
Pure Mind. Truth and right-mindedness increase
strength of character and make life take on a new
meaning. Through the workings of these will your
opponents be vanquished.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.1

Happiness to him who gives happiness to
whomsoever else. May God, who rules at will,
grant this. I wish for progress, strength of character,
and life renewed. For upholding truth, grant to me,
O Right-Mindedness, the blessings of a life spent
with a mind illumined by light.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.2

To him will come all that is best. Through striving
for light, man will attain light. As did the wise holy
spirit, O God. Grant to us truth, and the might of
the Pure Mind, growing every day within us in a
long life of fulfilment.


--- Page 141 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.12

And when you told me to follow truth to acquire
understanding, you did not tell me to do something
which will be unheeded by me. I will bestir within
myself my conscience which will then bless me
with the accompaniment of great light. You award
both the sides with their just dues.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.14

The wise Lord gives to his beloved mankind - to my
people, O Lord - the gift of joy which comes from
truth and strength. All men will unite in defence
of your teaching and in defence of those who are
mindful of your hymns.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.9

God and the Pure Mind do I seek to worship, who,
in his plan, has made for us both good and its
opposite, evil. God’s power has made us serve our
human flock so that they advance to the highest
truth and wisdom.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.5

Let rulers of good understanding rule - not those
of poor understanding —- by deeds which are both
good and wise, O Right-Mindedness. Dedication to
purity from birth onwards is best for mankind. For
Mother Earth should we toil, leading all men to
the realms of light.


--- Page 142 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.20

Of one accord are you all in granting us blessings,
O Truth, the Pure Mind, and the word of Right-
Mindedness. With humility will Your worshipper
yearn for bliss, O God.


--- Page 143 ---



--- Page 144 ---



--- Page 145 ---



--- Page 146 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas.28.1

To Almighty God, I pray in all humility, with uplifted
hands, which reach out for perfect happiness. This
prayer is, first of all, to the good spirit, which I seek
to emulate through deeds done for the love of truth.
These deeds are what bring wisdom, the highest that
the mind can attain. It is this wisdom that Mother
Earth needs most so that peace can be brought to
her.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.2

I would reach you, O Lord, through the Pure Mind.
Grant me both physical and mental well-being, the
rewards of living by truth. Those who are faithful
to You will be led by You into light (as opposed to
darkness).

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.3

To You, O Truth, and Pure Mind, shall I compose
hymns as never before, and unto the Lord, the Great
Creator, as well. Then, by Your limitless power, shall
right-mindedness increase which, when invoked,
comes to us to grant us perfect happiness.


--- Page 147 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.4

The soul/human mind on attuning itself to the pure
mind, will become aware that it is blessed because it
has done good deeds for the love of God. Therefore,
as long as I have the will and the strength, will I
teach mankind to strive for truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.5

On self-realization through wisdom, when will I
actually see the very embodiment of truth and the
pure mind? The path to Almighty God is obedience
to His will. (This is self-realization.) Through this
excellent verse will wicked people, by word of
mouth, be taught to choose correctly.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.6

You told me, O Lord, that following the path of
truth gives gifts which are of an enduring nature
— namely everlasting happiness which alone can
overcome hatred.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.7

Grant, O Truth, the reward of what is the best that
the mind can achieve. O Right-Mindedness, grant
this to Vistaspa and to my people, through Your
power, O Lord, so that Your worshippers may carry
out Your wishes.


--- Page 148 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.8

I wish for the best from the best - from truth and
You, O Lord, for Frashostra and for my people. This
is nothing less than the highest mental illumination/
joy through all time.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.9

Never, O Lord, O Truth, and O Pure Mind, may we
provoke to anger. May we come to You with hymns
of praise, for You are the best to invoke in prayer.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.10

You know those who are truthful, wise, and upright,
O Lord. Fulfil their desires — for, I know that prayers
by such devout persons to further goodness will not
remain unanswered by you.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 28.11

So, through prayer may I be reminded of truth and
high-mindedness forever. Please tell me Yourself, O
Lord, (through your own mouth) how life first came
into being.


--- Page 149 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.1

To You, O Lord, did Mother Earth complain: Why
did you create me in the first place? Iam surrounded
by anger, rapine, and violence, which aggressively
threaten me. For me, there is no protector other
than You. So tell me who will protect me effectively
against this onslaught.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.2

Thereupon the creator of Mother Earth asked
Absolute Truth: Where is the protector for Mother
Earth who can zealously perform this task? Which
powerful person can repel such hatred and anger?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.3

To God, the Absolute Truth, who binds all together,
and is inimical to none, replied: No such one is
known to me who can fight on the side of the upright.
Of all living persons must he be very strong. I will
try to respond as soon as possible.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.4

God bears in mind all prayers made to Him, past,
present, and future; those made by ordinary people
as well as the believers in many gods. God is the sole
judge: so let God’s will be done.


--- Page 150 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.5

Therefore, may we with hands uplifted, receive God’s
grace. Bountiful Mother Earth requests God thus:
Never may harm come to those who are upright or
to their leader, though they be surrounded by evil
persons.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.6

Thereupon spoke God, who pervades everything
with His wisdom: Is not a single powerful person
or a protector who is righteous known to you? Is
this why I made you protector of all things created
by me?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.7

Absolute truth is created by the holy word of sacrifice
uttered by God. God gives all the good things of
Mother Earth to the holy protectors because of their
teaching of truth to mankind. Who, O Pure Mind,
do you have in mind, who will save mankind?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.8

The Pure Mind answers: One such is known to
me - somebody who listened to our teaching -
Zarathustra Spitama. About God and truth is he
willing to speak. Grant him, therefore, the gift of
eloquence.


--- Page 151 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.9

Mother Earth wailed: How do I accept such feeble
support — a cowardly person - when I wanted a
powerful Lord. When, if ever, will I get effective
help from a strong protector?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.10

Do you, O Lord, Truth, and God’s Power, grant
strength to him so that he can give us peace and
make Mother Earth a good place to live in? Him do
we accept as our first saviour.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 29.11

When will truth, the pure mind, and God’s power
come to me? Please give recognition to the Magha
brotherhood, who will spread your teaching. Now
that help has arrived, we will serve you as protectors
of life on earth.


--- Page 152 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.1

To those who wish to hear, I shall speak of the two
created by God - this teaching is to instruct the
wise. I shall praise God and the Pure Mind, pray to
Truth, so that you all may grow spiritually to attain
light.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.2

Listen with your ears most attentively. Consider,
clearly, what I have to say. Choose before deciding
— man for man, each for himself, before this great
new age is ushered in. Each one of you, awaken to
this message.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.3

Now, in the beginning, there were two spirits. They
were twins (equal in all respects) and got on well
among themselves. In thought, word, and deed,
they reveal themselves as Good and Evil. Those who
are of greater understanding choose to be upright;
not so those who are of lesser understanding.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.4

In the beginning, when these two spirits worked
together, one fostered life and the other destroyed
it. So will it be: The worst to those who are evil, and
the best to those who are good.



--- Page 153 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.5

Of those two spirits, one chose to do its worst,
whereas the holy spirit chose to live by truth. The
holy spirit clothes itself in light imperishable and
pleases God by willingly doing good deeds from
good motives.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.6

Of the two, the believers in many gods chose
wrongly. They were deluded when they argued
among themselves concerning what is correct. They
chose to have the worst of motives combined with
deeds done in anger, which had baneful effects on
mankind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.7

Unto such will come God’s power, a mind which
is pure, and truth. Right-Mindedness will grant
continued spiritual progress, and they will be
triumphant in the ordeal that is life - as if they have
successfully gone through molten lava unscathed.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.8

But when retribution comes to those who indulge
in violence, God’s judgment will be clearly revealed.
It is then that the lie will be delivered into the hands
of truth.


--- Page 154 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.9

Those who make life worth living for others have
real companionship with truth. Such persons are
clear-minded and free from doubt, and are able
to withstand falsehood whenever reason sways in

doubt.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.10

When the short-lived triumph of those who are evil
is destroyed, they will get their just desserts. After
this, they will reach the abode wherein dwells the
Pure Mind, God, and Truth, and they will constantly
strive to do good.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.11

If you understand these principles which God
has laid down for Man - happiness and misery -
punishment of a long duration for those who are
evil, and upward progress for those who are good
— happiness will be your lot.


--- Page 155 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.1

Bearing in mind these divine laws do we deliver a
message hitherto unheard. People follow their evil
ways, which destroy truth in this world. This message
is understood best by those who have faith in God.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.2

Blinded by the teachings of those who are evil, the
better path is not clearly in sight. Therefore, have I
come to you all as God’s appointed instructor. God has
sent me as an instructor to both good and evil persons
so that we may all live in accordance with truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.3

You give to us fire in spirit and bliss, promised to
all who follow truth, so that those who can discern
correctly are given your divine revelation. Declare
this revelation from your own mouth so that all the
living may choose aright.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.4

When will you listen to me, O Truth, and you, O
Lord, in all your manifestations, and you, O Right-
Mindedness? Then shall I wish through the best
mind that God’s mighty power is bestowed on us
through the working of which the increase of evil
may be overcome.


--- Page 156 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.5

Declare what is true unto me so that I may decide
as to what is better for me. That I may know this
through the pure mind and feel exalted in whatever
good may come to me — whether it comes or does
not come.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.6

The best will be the lot of the wise man who speaks
the truth - words which bring perfection and
immortality in the realm of truth. Such is God’s
power, that with this thought, good intent will
increase from within.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.7

Who, through that first word, brought light down to
us from heavenly light. Who, through his wisdom,
is the creator of truth. The upholder of the highest
(mentally). That light do You brighten within us,
which has otherwise remained dormant till now.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.8

May I think of You as first and last - the be all and
end all of everything - always. As the father of the
highest mind. May I behold You in my mind’s eye
as the true creator of truth and the lord over the
actions of the living.


--- Page 157 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.9

Yours has been right-mindedness and the wisdom
which created life, O God. Unto life have You
granted the choice of following the teachings of
a true protector or the wiles of a false so-called
protector.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.10

So between these two, let the choice as shepherd be
for a man who possesses truth, a promoter of the
best of intentions. Never, O Lord, may a wolf in
sheep’s clothing purport to spread Your message.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.11

From the beginning, O Lord, You created life and
thought to minds of understanding. You created
upliftment for mankind - after all, deeds, teachings,
and wills are a matter of individual choice.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.12

Therefore, each loudly proclaims whatever he
wishes — whether it be false or true; whether it be
wise or foolish - with head and heart, his spirit
stands beside Right-Mindedness, questioning as to
how to resolve his doubts.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.13

These questions are asked openly or secretly. When,
for a small act of violence, one undergoes the highest


--- Page 158 ---

penance, this is observed by You clearly, along with
Truth.

AHUNAVAITI -Yas. 31.14

This do I ask You, O Lord: How was it in the past
and how will it be in the future? How have You
noted the wishes of the righteous and those of the
unrighteous, and how will you deal with them once
their accounts are closed?

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.15

I ask this: What is the punishment for those who
advance the power of evil doers, O Lord? Those
who find nothing better than to injure the protector
who opposes evil, and to injure his human flock.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.16

Task this: Any man who strives earnestly to increase
truth in the home, in the town, in the district, or in
the entire nation — how is he to act so that he is of
one accord with You, O Lord.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.17

Which of the two paths do either the righteous
or unrighteous choose as the better one? Let the
enlightened person explain this to the man of good
understanding. Let the man of poor understanding
not lead us astray. Do You, O God, instruct us about
the purity of the mind.


--- Page 159 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.18

Let not any of you listen to the words and teachings
of those who are evil. Because such persons make
this earth a miserable place. It is only when such
persons come to kill you that you can resist their
violence with violence.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.19

Whoever listens to and thinks of Truth becomes
wise and helps life. He will be eloquent in his speech
with words which are true. Through the blazing fire
of judgement will you assign the next dwelling place
to all of mankind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.20

Whoever follows those who are righteous will abide
in light. But to long ages of darkness, and words of
misery, will the evil person lead himself, thanks to
his way of thinking and his deeds.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.21

God will grant perfection and immortality, and,
through his wholeness, truth, God’s power, and
pure-mindedness, all of which sustain life, to one
who is his friend in spirit and in action.


--- Page 160 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.22

Clear are these teachings to the wise and to those
whose minds are attuned to high-mindedness. With
the help of God’s power and truth such person,
through his words and deeds, helps God.


--- Page 161 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.1

To God pray all three grades of the Magha
brotherhood, as also the believers in many gods, in
the same way and as earnestly. May the brotherhood
become your messengers to repel those who spread
duplicity.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.2

To them, the Pure Mind, who is united in God,
through his power replied: associate closely with
Truth. Be good and unite with Right-Mindedness.
Hold fast unto them.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.3

But all you believers in many gods are clearly from
the evil spirit - and so are those who greatly honour
you. Among you are liars, self-centered people and
even those who are duplicitous, and men without
conscience.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.4

And so you have brought about a situation where
men doing the worst are called beloved of ‘the gods:
They have moved away from high-mindedness,
God’s wisdom, and strayed from the path of truth.


--- Page 162 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.5

Thus, did you cheat mankind of a good life on
Earth, and immortality in the future. The evil spirit
deceived you into bad thought, word, and deed
when it taught you that evil will reign supreme.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.6

Thus deluded, a complete sinner might appear
to succeed and become famous. But God, who
remembers all, is aware of his real worth - for verily
Truth, High-Mindedness, and God’s power, all of
which instruct us, shall prevail.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.7

These violent persons do not understand the
Herculean effort required to tread the path of truth,
which is taught by life's molten metal test. You know
best, O Lord, what fate is in store for them.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.8

Among these violent persons were Vivanhuso and
Yima, who, desiring to placate mankind, illumined
what is material instead of what is spiritual on Earth.
From persons such as these may I stand apart on the
Day of Judgement.


--- Page 163 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.9

The false teacher distorts the scriptures, and through
his teachings corrupts life. He removes from us
our real desire - the precious realization of high-
mindedness. I have spoken out what is in my mind
and appeal to You and to Truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.10

Such person distorts the scriptures when he says it
is worst to be outdoors and in the sun. He makes
the good follow evil. He hurls weapons against the
righteous and poisons our habitat.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.11

Persons like this corrupt life. They regard as great,
evil lords and their evil ladies. They deprive us of
our true inheritance - the best that truth has to
offer. They distract the mind, O God.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.12

Through such teachings they turn mankind away
from doing the best deeds. For such as these, God
decrees retribution. They corrupt life with their glib
words. Grehma prefers to run after untruth instead
of the truth.


--- Page 164 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.13

Whatever power this Grehma hopes to win in

the worst mind’s abode he will ultimately destroy
himself. He will then desire to know what is God’s
real message. But I will watch over his threats to
those who are truthful.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.14

Grehma and evil kings direct their energies since
the days of yore, to ensnare good people. They
approach evil persons for help, and doom Mother
Earth to death in the hope that they are invincible.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.15

Thus are brought to ruin the plans of evil priests
and evil kings. They are unfit to rule over persons
who will ultimately be carried into the domain of
the pure mind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 32.16

This is the true teaching of a teacher who is followed
correctly. You have power over those who plan to
menace me. Therefore, I will restrain violent and
evil persons from hurting your devotees.


--- Page 165 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.1

In accord with divine principles do I act; these are
the laws governing life from the very beginning. The
Teacher will act justly to both the righteous and the
unrighteous and weigh the admixture of falsehood
and truth in each.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.2

Whosoever frustrates evil by thought, word, or
deed, or instructs his companion to do good,
accomplishes life’s purpose out of love for God.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.3

Whosoever unto the righteous is the best, whether
he be of any grade of the Magha brotherhood, or
helps with zeal the living, will be at one with truth,
and will dwell in the pastures of the Pure Mind.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.4

Therefore, acting against my conscience, and evil
intent, will I correct by prayer, O Lord. And from the
spiritually self-sufficient will I pray away perverse
thought; from the worker who spreads the faith
the envy of his evil relations; and from the friend
to mankind slanderers; and from Mother Earth, the
teacher of evil.


--- Page 166 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.5

Therefore, do I invoke Conscience, the best of all, to
reach our final goal which is long life in the security
of the pure mind, having followed the straight path
of truth, which leads to where God alone rules.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.6

Therefore, as invoker of Truth’s straight path do I
pray with the highest or loftiest motives. I invoke
His Grace. That I may fulfil my role as the protector,
as planned. Therefore, do I wish a vision of God and
communication with God.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.7

Come to me, O Best of All, unmistakably in your
own person, together with Truth and Pure Mind,
in order that I may be heard beyond the Magha
brotherhood. May You give to us clearly the duties
we have to perform which are dedicated with
humble reverence to You.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.8

Carefully see for Yourself my purpose which I
pursue with a good motive. Worship is of only You,
though I speak words of praise for truth as well.
Grant us the blessing of perfection and immortality
once life changes our direction to the path of good.


--- Page 167 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.9

These two spiritual attainments, O Lord, are mighty
promoters of truth - they bring light and strength.
May the Pure Mind bring their assistance to us from
afar — they whose souls work as one.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.10

All lives well spent — past, present, or future, O Lord,
are Yours. Out of Your grace, allow the Pure Mind,
Truth, and Your power to come to us and increase
within us happiness.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.11

You are Almighty, O Lord, Right-Mindedness,
Truth, and God’s power, and You all bless life. Listen
to me and take pity on me while apportioning just
desserts to all.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.12

Unfold Yourself within me, O Lord. Grant me
strength of character through right-mindedness.
Through the holiest spirit, O Lord, grant me
goodness as a reward for prayer. Grant me a life full
of vigour through truth, and may the Pure Mind
look after me.


--- Page 168 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.13

Give me bliss, make me far-seeing, and reveal to
me your incomparable gifts - Your power, and
the blessings of the Pure Mind. O Holy Right-
Mindedness, teach us clearly as to how truth guides
our way of thinking.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.14

Therefore, Zarathustra offers himself and_ his
upliftment to God, and dedicates the first fruits
of his thought inspired by the loftiest motives, his
deeds of truth, and his words uttered according to
his conscience - in effect, his whole being.


--- Page 169 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.1

The path of truth - words, deeds, and worship,
brings immortality, and through Your power, O
God, perfection. May we bring this to mankind by
propagating this most zealously, O Lord.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.2

To You do we turn our minds, full of the revelations
of the Pure Mind and the deeds of holy men, whose
souls are at one with truth. Lead us near You, O
Lord, worshipping You by singing You praises.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.3

Whatever is due to You, O Lord, and to Truth, will
I give with all humility. All lives which, with Your
power, promote the Pure Mind, and can be seen
as good (in realms far away from Earth) have bliss
forever when living with God.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.4

And for Your fire, O Lord, mighty through truth, do
we yearn; powerful and giving clear help to those
who are constantly faithful. But, O God, the fire sees
through those who are unfaithful to You.


--- Page 170 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.5

How great is Your power, and my wish to do good
deeds, so that I may be with You, O Lord, Truth,
and Pure Mind? In order to protect those in need,
we speak of You as above all others and apart from
‘other gods’ and wicked men.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.6

Since You are such in reality, O Lord, Truth, and
Pure Mind, guide me when doubts arise, at every
stage of life, so that your worshipper is free from the
load which ultimately weighs the soul down.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.7

Where are your devotees, O Lord, whose minds
are filled with understanding? Who, in times of
ill fortune and trouble, teach us about our true
inheritance which liberates our minds from the
thought of the misery brought about by retribution?
Nobody other than You do I acknowledge. Therefore,
protect mankind through truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.8

Of those persons who do good are evil persons who
are afraid of them - but they are harmful to many.
Being powerful, they oppress mankind, defying
Your law, O God. Those who stray from the path of
truth are far away from the Pure Mind.


--- Page 171 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.9

Holy Right-Mindedness, bounteous and wise, is
ignored by those doing evil. They are ignorant
of pure-mindedness. From such as these, truth
withdraws completely, just as uncultured and evil
persons withdraw from good persons.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.10

Unto such, doing deeds out of pure motives, do
persons of good understanding speak about the Holy
Right-Mindedness, which gives true understanding
and puts persons on the path of truth. All of them
will come to You, O Lord, once they have knowledge
of Your dominion over all.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.11

And both perfection and immortality lead onwards
to light and display the power of the Pure Mind.
Truth and right-mindedness increase strength of
character and make life take on a new meaning.
Through the working of these will your opponents
be vanquished.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.12

What is Your law, Your will, concerning Your
worship. Speak to me clearly, O Lord, so that the
blessings of rectitude come upon us. Lead us onto
the path of truth and self-realization through the
pure mind.


--- Page 172 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.13

That path, O Lord, which You pointed out to me - the
creed of all saviours — that every good deed inspired
by lofty motives alone, goes far. This teaching is for
the clear-sighted, leading to the ultimate reward
which You will grant.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.14

That reward, O Lord, worth having, is granting
spiritual upliftment to those in the flesh for deeds
done from a pure mind. Those who serve our
abundant Mother Earth - through Your power
and wisdom, O Lord, will do Your will - and gain
fulfillment by tasks of truth.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.15

O God, teach me how to be best in word and deed.
This is what I yearn for in my prayer, praising Truth
and the Pure Mind. Through Your power, make my
life take a new direction, now that truth has entered
it.


--- Page 173 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.1

Happiness to him who gives happiness to
whomsoever else. May God who rules at will grant
this. I wish for progress, strength of character, and
life renewed. For upholding truth, grant to me, O
Right-Mindedness, the blessings of a life spent with
a mind illumined by light.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.2

To him will come all that is best. Through striving
for light, man will attain light. As did the wise holy
spirit, O God. Grant to us truth, and the might of
the Pure Mind, growing every day within us in a
long life of fulfillment.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.3

Surely the best will come to him who teaches us
about the path of righteousness, which leads to bliss,
both mental and physical, leading to the worlds of
reality where God dwells. May Your devotee, who is
wise and good, be one with You, O God.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.4

May I recognize You as holy and powerful, O Lord,
who, with a mere wave of the hand, does fulfil our


--- Page 174 ---

longings. You give both the good and the evil their
just desserts. Through Your blazing fire, mighty
with truth, will mental strength come to me.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.5

I have realized that You are holy, O Lord, when I
recognized that You were the first, even before life
came into being. You have ordained that all words
and deeds will bear fruit. Misery to those who are
evil, and the blessings of well-being to those who
are good. Thus shall it be till the ultimate goal of
creation is reached.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.6

At which goal You stand, O Lord, with the holy
spirit, Your power and the Pure Mind, through all
of whom life advances along the path of truth. These
are pointed out by Right-Mindedness’s teaching — the
doing of Your will, which can be thwarted by no one.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.7

As holy have I recognized You, O Lord, when the
pure mind entered me and asked: Who are you?
Where do you belong? What daily signs are given to
allay doubts about oneself and one’s life?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.8

I am in the first place Zarathustra, dedicated to
good, and the true adversary of evil, to the extent


--- Page 175 ---

I can contain it. To the righteous, I will be a source
of strength and joy. In future, may I be gifted with
Your infinite power so long as I am your devotee, O
Lord, and sing hymns of praise to You.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.9

As holy, indeed, have I recognized You, O Lord,
when the Pure Mind entered me and asked: To
whom should I pay homage? Henceforth, I will pay
homage to fire with all humility. And I will live by
truth, which is my own desire.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.10

So do You give to me truth, for whom I yearn,
accompanied by right-mindedness. You question
mankind and test us — passing the test makes us
strong, so that tested by you, mankind is made
strong.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.11

As holy indeed have I recognized You, O Lord,
when the Pure Mind entered me.

When I was first taught by Your revelation, my faith
in the goodness of mankind helps me in times of
difficulty and I do what I have been taught by you
— to be best.


--- Page 176 ---

VERSE TRANSLATION OF THE GATHAS 175

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.12

And when you told me to follow truth to acquire
understanding, you did not tell me to do something
which will be unheeded by me. I will bestir within
myself my conscience which will then bless me with
the accompaniment of great light. You award both
the sides with their just dues.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.13

As holy indeed have I recognized You, O Lord, when
the Pure Mind entered me and asked: To ascertain
the purpose of our wishes, grant that to me - long
life, which no one dares to ask from You, and the
blessed existence in Your dominion.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.14

The wise Lord gives to his beloved mankind - to my
people, O Lord - the gift of joy which comes from
truth and strength. All men will unite in defence
of your teaching and in defence of those who are
mindful of your hymns.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.15

As holy, indeed, have I recognized You, O Lord,
when the Pure Mind entered me and said that silent
meditation is good for spiritual growth. Never
should any person try to placate evil persons for they
will always regard the righteous as their enemies.


--- Page 177 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.16

O Lord, Zarathustra chooses for himself the way of
the holy spirit. May Truth incarnate uplift us with
her strength. May Right-Mindedness and Your
power, resplendent as the sun, bless deeds done
from good motives.


--- Page 178 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.1
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How should your devotees worship you? Let your
assistant Truth, O God, point out this to me -
until the revelations of the Pure Mind arrive to all
mankind.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.2

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

The first thing in life is to strive for the best: to lead
another yearning soul to attain the best, for, such
person indeed is holy through truth, and will attain
the goal of all mankind. This person is our guardian
spirit and life-renewing friend, O Lord

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.3

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Which Being, our father, first created truth? Which
Being laid down the path of the sun and the stars?
Through which Being does the moon wax and wane
alternately? All this and other things do I wish to
know, O Lord.



--- Page 179 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.4

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Which Being supports the Earth and the other
worlds? Which Being created the waters and the
plants? Which Being moves the wind and dark
clouds? Which Being, O Lord, is the creator of the
pure mind?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.5

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Who created light and darkness? Who created
sleep and wakefulness? Who created dawn, day,
and night? All these instruct the wise about life’s
purpose.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.6

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

I will ask whether this is indeed true: Right-
Mindedness, working through good deeds,
increases truth. Right-Mindedness promises this
through Your power and through the pure mind.
For whom did you fashion this abundant and joy-
giving Mother Earth?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.7
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Who created Your precious power and right-
mindedness? Who, with his living breath, made



--- Page 180 ---

the son follow the father? Thus, would I clearly
recognize You, O Lord, as the creator of the holy
spirit and everything else.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.8
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Reveal your plan, O God, so that we may rejoice in
it — the revelations of the Pure Mind shall I seek -
and truth, to correctly understand life's purpose, so
that my soul shall go ahead in attaining all that is
good.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.9

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How shall I bring to perfection my way of thinking
through Your wisdom, O Father, and through Your
power. For, in truth, Your power brings blessings to
us, O Lord - may I dwell in Your abode with Truth
and the Pure Mind.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.10

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Your revelation is best for all living beings, which
advances truth and life and guides aright our words
and deeds, O Right-Mindedness, so that my desire
to understand Your will, O Lord, is fulfilled.


--- Page 181 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.11

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How will Right-Mindedness penetrate those to
whom Your revelation is proclaimed? For this task
have I been sent as the first - all others who are
sham do I regard with hostility.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.12

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Who will I associate with - the righteous or those
who are evil? On which side am I - the victim or
the perpetrator of evil? The doer of evil sets himself
against truth and its rewards - is it not that such
person as this thinks not aright?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.13

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How do we keep lies away from us? How do we keep
away those who are conscienceless — who do not want
to keep company with Truth and the Pure Mind.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.14

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How shall I deliver the lie into the hands of the
truth? How will I overthrow the lie by teaching Your
holy word? How do I bring complete frustration of
the plans of those who are evil? How do I get them
into trouble and get them to be hated?


--- Page 182 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.15

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Since you are able to protect me through truth
when both sides together invoke You - then, in
accordance with Your law, to which of these will
You grant victory?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.16

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

Which victor will protect all who exist through
his teachings? Clearly reveal to me the guide who
will give life a new direction. To him grant pure-
mindedness and an active conscience, O Lord, and
to whomsoever else, as well.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.17

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How do I attain the goal set by You, O Lord -
how do I become your companion, so that I may
convince mankind about our common future,
namely perfection and immortality, attained
through Your holy word, which is our best guide
owing to its truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.18

This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

How shall I earn through truth that reward: Material
wealth in the form of ten mares, led by a stallion,


--- Page 183 ---

and a camel, so that I may bring perfection and
immortality to mankind.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.19
This do I ask You, tell me truly, O Lord:

What happens to those who do not reward persons
who speak the truth? What is their punishment at
present? I know what will happen to them at the
end.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 44.20

How, O Lord, have the followers of polytheism
become so powerful? This do I ask: Those who are
self-centered have delivered Mother Earth to wrath
and continuous wailing, like the priests of old and
evil rulers, who do not advance and increase the
cause of truth.



--- Page 184 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.1

Now will I explain - give me your ear and listen,
those who have come from nearby, and those who
have come from afar. And please try to understand
what I have to say and keep it clearly in mind. Never
again will the preacher of evil destroy life. He has
become evil and speaks evil because he has gone
astray and chosen to be evil.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.2

I will explain about the two spirits at life’s beginning
— of whom the holy one spoke to the evil one thus:
Between us, neither thoughts, nor teachings, nor
understanding, nor moral choice, nor words, nor
deeds, nor way of thinking, nor souls, are alike.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.3

I will explain the first thing that should be known
about life, this was revealed to me by God. Those
among you who do not put into practice these
hymns as I understand and speak them will only
land up in misery at the end of life.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.4

And I will explain about the best there is in life.
Because of following the path of truth, God has


--- Page 185 ---

revealed it to me. He is the father of the active and
good mind and his daughter, Right-Mindedness,
makes us do good deeds. God, who is all-seeing, is
never deceived.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.5

I will explain what the Holiest has revealed to me.
What He says is best for mortals to hear. Those
who obey and revere it will attain perfection and
immortality and through deeds done from the
loftiest motives, God Himself.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.6

And I will explain about the greatest of all, praising
His wisdom and truth. Through the holy spirit,
may God listen to us. Through the Pure Mind, may
I become devoted to Him. May He in His wisdom
guide me onwards to the highest.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.7

To all seekers of salvation, past, present, and future,
I have this to say: The soul of the righteous will be
victorious and will gain immortality. Ever renewed
are times of trouble for those who are evil. This is
sent by God through His power.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.8

Him do I seek to praise, in all humility. Indeed, I
have seen him with my mind’s eye. By good thought,



--- Page 186 ---

deed, and word, and by knowledge brought by the
path of truth have I perceived God Himself. Let
us, therefore, offer songs of devotion to Him in the
abode of song where God dwells.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.9

God and the Pure Mind do I seek to worship, who,
in his plan, has made for us both good and its
opposite, evil. God’s power has made us serve our
human flock so that they advance to the highest
truth and wisdom.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.10

Him, through devotion to right-mindedness, will
I seek - who is forever known as the Lord who
is the Great Creator. For, through Truth and the
Pure Mind, He has promised that through His
power, perfection, and immortality will be given
to all persons, as also strength of character and life
renewed.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.11

Who in future opposes ‘the gods’ and their followers;
who despises them and opposes them, they being
so different from Him; and he who thinks with
reverence of Him, is a saviour, a wise father, a holy
thinker, a friend, a brother, and a father, O Lord.


--- Page 187 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.1

To which land can I flee? They hold me apart from
my Magha brothers - evil rulers keep me away from
them. How do I carry out your mission, O Lord?

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.2

I know why I am helpless — I have a small following
because I am a man of a few possessions. Please
consider this fact carefully, O Lord. I wish for the
bliss that one friend gives to the other - teach me
about the might of the Pure Mind through truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.3

When, O Lord, will there be a new dawn when truth
shall shine forth from all life, following the effective
teachings of wise saviours. To whose help this shall
come, together with the Pure Mind - I have chosen
You as the subject of my teaching.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.4

And evil persons all around us thwart the righteous
from helping life. These persons are enemies of life,
as shown by their actions. Whosoever opposes them
with all his life and strength, O Lord, is a helper
along the paths of holy wisdom.


--- Page 188 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.5

Whoever, being in a position of strength, receives
any person in kindness or in friendship, and
whoever receives anybody because he is a follower
of Your revelation; is blessed; and even if such a
person, being righteous, receives an evil person, he
should teach him the path to salvation to save him
from destruction, O Lord.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.6

But, whoever, being able to do so, does not do so,
shall himself be ensnared by evil. Because he who
is good to those who are evil is himself evil. And
he who befriends the righteous is himself righteous.
This is Your law ever since You first created us.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.7

Who, O Lord, will protect me when evil persons
threaten me with violence? Who other than Your
fire and the Pure Mind? When they both are at work
within me, truth prevails, O Lord. Declare this clearly
so that I may understand this philosophical truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.8

Whoever is violent to life, his deeds of flaming hate
will not touch me but will recoil on him, this which
keeps him from the good life, but not from hateful
evil ways.


--- Page 189 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.9

Who is Your foremost devotee who will teach me
to regard You as worthy of worship - as holy judge
over our actions. And Truth has revealed You as the
creator of Mother Earth. I wish for truth and for
your pure mind.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.10

Whichever man or woman, O God, gives to life what
is regarded by You as best will have the blessing of
truth and mental strength. I will lead such persons
across the bridge which separates the good from
those who are evil.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.11

Through their power, priests and kings would
destroy mankind through their evil ways. But their
own conscience and thought shall trouble them
when they come near to the bridge of the separator.
Through all time will they live in the abode of
misery.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.12

Among the descendants and progeny of the
Turanians, there will emerge the strong Fryana
who through right-mindedness zealously helps the
living. He will help them to reach the pure mind
and bliss, which God will grant.


--- Page 190 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.13

Whosoever helps Zarathustra Spitama will among
men be known as upright - to him shall God grant life
and through the pure mind advance life in general.
Him do we regard as having bonded with truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.14

Zarathustra, who is loyal to Truth? Who will make
famous your great brotherhood? King Vistaspa has
ushered in this new era. You have made him king in
this kingdom which is well administered, O Lord,
so that I may deliver Your message which I have
received from the Pure Mind.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.15

The Haecat-aspa and Spitama family doI speak to, so
that you may discriminate between understanding
and ignorance. Through deeds of truth will you
march forward in accord with God’s primeval law.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.16

Frashostra — go there with other devotees. For you
all we wish eternal happiness, where truth and
right-mindedness meet; Where the Pure Mind
reigns supreme; where God dwells in all His glory.


--- Page 191 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.17

I have told you that action, not inaction, is best,
O Wise Jamaspa. With Your conscience aroused,
do You seek to worship - You will discriminate
between understanding and ignorance. God and
Truth are our wonderful protectors.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.18

Whosoever is wholeheartedly with me do I
promise the best. I wish for him the blessings of
the pure mind. But I will oppose that man who
opposes me, fulfilling your wish, O Lord, through
truth. This choice is made by my own mental
discrimination.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.19

Whoever will accomplish through truth and His will
this complete renovation on Earth for Zarathustra,
to him will be given the reward of eternal life,
together with all that he desires from our bountiful
Mother Earth. All this You did reveal to me, O Lord,
most Wise.


--- Page 192 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.1

By the holy spirit and best mind, by words and deeds
of truth, perfection and immortality are bestowed
by God, His power and Right-Mindedness.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.2

Thus, the best and holiest spirit speaks words of the
highest wisdom. With Right-Mindedness helping it
does it toil, doing good deeds with both its hands,
inspired by the thought that God is the father of truth.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.3

You are indeed the father of the holy spirit - You
have fashioned our joyful Mother Earth for it,
and to protect it have you sent Peace, and Right-
Mindedness, and the Pure Mind, when it asked for
help.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.4

Because of this spirit, the evil persons’ plans are
frustrated, O God - but not those of the righteous.
Only one who has little material wealth is inclined
to be righteous. But being rich and powerful, such
person is inclined to being evil.


--- Page 193 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.5

Through this holy spirit, O God, have you promised
the best to the righteous. The evil person will get his
just desserts removed from Your love, because of his
evil intent and bad deeds.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 47.6

These things are given by the holy spirit to us, O
God - through fire shall be determined the just
dues of both parties. When right-mindedness and
truth increase, many seekers will choose aright.



--- Page 194 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.1

Since on Judgement Day truth triumphs over
untruth - when a person attains immortality,
which has been said to be a delusion - then will the
devotees of many gods and other people who will
witness this increase their devotion to You, O Lord.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.2

Reveal to me what You know, O Lord; when
retribution takes over in the life beyond: Whether
truth conquers untruth, O Lord. That would indeed
be the grand finale of life.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.3

This would be for those who understand the best
teaching — that which is taught by the wisdom of
truth. Holy and wise are the teachers of that which
cannot be seen - they are Yours, O God, having the
Pure Mind’s wisdom.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.4

Whosoever makes his mind better or worse, his
words and deeds show his way of thinking. He
chooses for himself - at the end, in your wisdom,
will he stand apart (depending on the choice made).


--- Page 195 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.5

Let rulers of good understanding rule - not those
of poor understanding —- by deeds which are both
good and wise, O Right-Mindedness. Dedication
to purity from birth onwards is best for mankind.
For Mother Earth should we toil, leading all men to
realms of light.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.6

She alone is our safe haven - the gifts of the Pure
Mind are strength of character and life renewed.
God, through Truth, has clothed her with vegetation,
which nourished life at the very beginning.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.7

Keep hatred far away and steel yourselves against
violence, those of you who wish to cling onto the
best wisdom. To increase truth, be in the company
of holy men, who will lead such persons to Your
abode, O Lord.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.8

How greatly do I yearn for the best, O Lord, through
Your power. May this blessing be given to all Your
people, O God. To Your devotees who wish for the
truth, will the best spirit manifest itself, to help
them do good deeds.



--- Page 196 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.9

When will I know that You rule over all, O Lord and
Truth, even those who plot against and threaten
me? Tell me truly, and reveal this to me through
the Pure Mind. The saviour should know what is in
store for him.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.10

When, O Lord, will there be men who will come
to spread the faith? When will this infatuation with
piss be eradicated, through which evil priests and
wicked rulers of evil intent dupe people in this
place?

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.11

When, O Lord, will Truth, Right-Mindedness, and
Your power bring protection to mankind so that
this Earth becomes a good place to live in. Who will
bring peace to mankind when those who are blood-
thirsty and evil reign? When will the wisdom of the
Pure Mind return?

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.12

Such are the saviours of this land, who are guided
by the Pure Mind’s wisdom. Because of their deeds
of truth and their teachings of God and the spread
of the divine message, hatred will be vanquished.



--- Page 197 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.1

Bendva has always resisted me greatly. I wish to win
him over from his evil ways, O Lord. In Your mercy,
give me the reward of defeating him by telling him
about the revelations of the pure mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.2

Indeed Bendva makes me anxious. His evil teachings
and duplicity separates him from the truth. Never
does he commune with the Holy Right-Mindedness
or the Pure Mind, O Lord.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.3

God has decreed the teaching that truth will prevail
and untruth will be neutralized. So, choose carefully.
Therefore, would I ask for association with the Pure
Mind and prohibit association with all those who
are wicked.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.4

Evil persons increase hatred and cruelty with their
speech - wolves among shepherds. Those who
perpetrate evil don't have any desire to do good
deeds. Such men create false gods and evil ways of
thinking.


--- Page 198 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.5

But he, O Lord, who, through earnest desire and
zeal, links his way of thinking with the Pure Mind -
each such applies right-mindedness and grows wise
by following truth - all such will dwell under Your
rule, O Lord.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.6

I urge you earnestly, O Lord and Truth, to state
what lies in store for us in future so that, deciding
correctly, we may proclaim your faith to your
devotees, O Lord.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.7

Let each one listen to the Pure Mind and Truth, O
Lord - do You, O Lord, bear witness to this - so that
the spiritually self-reliant and the friend of mankind
live according to Your law and set a good example
to the worker who spreads Your message.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.8

Grant to Frashostra joy, the gift of truth. This do I
ask of You — and association with You, O Lord, and
the same for my people (which is best for them),
under Your rule. May we be inspired by this thought
through all time.


--- Page 199 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.9

Let the protector listen to Your teachings so that he
can lead aright. Never should the speaker of truth
associate with evil, so that his higher self may get
the reward of uniting with truth and ushering in a
new age, O Wise Jamaspa.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.10

And this, O Lord, will I find in Your abode, in Your
great dominion - the Pure Mind, and the souls
of the righteous, who filled with humility and the
desire to be right-minded, look kindly on mankind
in support.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.11

Evil rulers, evil doers, evil speakers, men with evil
intent, and followers of untruth — all such evil souls
go to the abode of misery where truly they will dwell.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 49.12

What help will come to Your worshipper? What
help will come to Zarathustra from the Pure Mind?
I would sing hymns to please You, O Lord, asking
for that which is best.


--- Page 200 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.1

From where can I get help for my flock? Who can
I find to be our protector other than truth, O Lord,
and the Pure Mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.2

How does one look after joy-giving Mother Earth
while selfishly seeking constant protection for
himself. Those who are upright and live by truth
move into sunlit regions living among those who
are wise.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.3

But especially she (Mother Earth) will come to him
with truth, O Lord, and with Your power and the
Pure Mind, as promised. That man is twice blessed
who helps those near him in a world in which evil
predominates.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.4

And worshipping You and praising You, O God,
with Truth and Pure Mind and Your power, may he
who desires to hear Your revelation listen to Your
devotees in the abode of song.


--- Page 201 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.5

From beyond, O Lord and Truth, may I sing that
which is revealed to me - Your joy-giving hymns.
You can help us with a wave of the hand (which I
can see clearly) which will lead us to light.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.6

I, Zarathustra, will sing these uplifting hymns, O
Lord, befriended by Truth, in all humility. May the
creator of wisdom always guide my tongue - may
he teach me and guide me through the Pure Mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.7

Lead me to the path to adore You, O Lord, Truth
and the mighty Pure Mind, so that leading us, You
become our helpers.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.8

Ever with chants which well up to You from within
may I reach You with hands uplifted, O Lord. As
Your humble devotee, may I reach Truth and the
great wisdom of the Pure Mind.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.9

With these hymns of praise may I come to You, O
Lord, O Truth, and through deeds, to the Pure Mind
when I have fully achieved all I have set out to do. I
yearn to become the possessor of Your wisdom.


--- Page 202 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.10

All deeds, which I will do and have done and which
are worthy in the eye of the Pure Mind, fill my days
with the beautiful dawn and sunlight, both of which
glorify truth and You, O Lord.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 50.11

I am your staunch worshipper, and will always be,
O Lord, as long as I have the will and the strength.
Life’s laws are accomplished through the pure mind,
so that in accord with Your will, the renovation of
mankind is achieved.


--- Page 203 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.1

God's power is great. It comes as a reward to those
who are dedicated and eager to serve the cause of
truth. By doing deeds of truth will one reach the
highest — for that alone will I strive now and always.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.2

First of all, these deeds are dedicated to You, O Lord,
and Truth, and Right-Mindedness. Teach me about
Your power and Your will. Through the Pure Mind,
grant upward progress to Your worshipper.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.3

Let all those who do good deeds come together
to foster Mother Earth. God and Truth speak the
language of revelation that comes from the highest
mind - from the beginning have You been the
teacher.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.4

Which shepherd will look after Your worshipper?
When will compassion take over? When will truth
take over? And when will right-mindedness do the
same? Where is the highest mind and Your power,
O God?


--- Page 204 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.5

Questioning about all these as to how he should
advance life in truth, the protector, upright in his
deeds, acquires good insight through humility. He
is the true guide to those who are wise, bringing
them blessings.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.6

Whosoever proves himself to be better than good,
thus fulfilling life's purpose, will be helped by God’s
power. But it shall be worse than bad for him who
does not do so at the final end of life.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.7

Grant me, O Creator of Mother Earth, the waters
and plant life, immortality and perfection through
Your holiest spirit, O Lord. Grant me strength of
character and life renewed through the teachings of
the Pure Mind.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.8

Your message willl preach - this should be proclaimed
only to those with understanding. Misery will come
to those who are evil - and happiness to those who
cling to truth. He who spreads this word to those
who understand will be happy.



--- Page 205 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.9

The just desserts which are given to both sides
by Your blazing fire, O God, through the molten
metal test - may that grant us spiritual guidance.
Frustrated will be those who are evil and blessed
those who are good.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.10

And the man who seeks to destroy, contrary to
these laws, O God, is himself the child of the lie. All
such are of poor understanding. For my people will
I invoke Truth to come to us with its best blessings.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.11

Who is the friend of Zarathustra? Who communes
with truth, and holy right-mindedness, and the
highest ideals — thus regarding himself as an upright
member of the Magha brotherhood?

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.12

Not satisfactory to me, Zarathustra, is the smooth
passage of evil kings through this world. Because
spiritual growth is attained by those who, with
ardent fervour, toil for it.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.13

Thus, do the evil corrupt upright and truthful ways of
thinking. Their souls will chide them and send them,


--- Page 206 ---

when on the path of the separator, to misery. For this
they are themselves to blame, as by their own words
and deeds they have strayed from the path of truth.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.14

Neither to God’s laws nor to man’s do the priests
listen with reverence. They deceive good persons.
Through their deeds and teachings will they be
consigned to the abode of woe/misery.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.15

The reward which Zarathustra has promised to the
Magha brotherhood comes from beyond - the house
of song which was first inhabited by God Himself,
and the blessings of Truth and the Pure Mind.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.16

This reward King Vistapa has attained through the
power of the brotherhood and the hymns which
come from the highest mind. This is the wisdom
decreed by Truth and the Holy God who leads us
to happiness.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.17

Precious Frashostra Hvogva eagerly offers himself
for the good cause. May Almighty God grant him
his earnest desire of attaining truth.


--- Page 207 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.18

This is the wisdom of the wise Jamaspa Hvogva,
who desiring light, has chosen the path of truth and
the strength that comes with the revelations of the
Pure Mind. Grant this to me so that I may forever
cling to You, O Lord.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.19

Therefore, that man, O Maidyo-Manha, shall
dedicate to him realization of the self. Whoever
wishes to understand the meaning of life is better

able to demonstrate God’s laws through doing good
deeds.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.20

Of one accord are you all in granting us blessings,
O Truth, the Pure Mind, and the word of Right-
Mindedness. With humility will Your worshipper
yearn for bliss, O God.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.21

That man is holy who is filled with right-mindedness.
Through his wisdom, words, deeds, and way of
thinking, he promotes truth. May God give him the
power of the Pure Mind - for this highest blessing
do I pray.


--- Page 208 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.22

To him who makes every act of worship an act of
truth is regarded as the best by God. All such who
have been and who are do I bless in their own names
and will, with respect, reach out to all of them.


--- Page 209 ---

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas. 53.1

Zarathustra has been granted eternal life because he
followed the path of truth. Even those who opposed
him have now understood his teachings and are
following his faith in word and deed.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas. 53.2

Let all persons strive to be good with thought, word,
and deed, and worship God thus. King Vistasp, who
was devoted to Zarathustra and Frashostra, having
followed the path of truth, has worshipped God in
the manner that the saviour taught.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas. 53.3

Pouru Chista, Zarathustra’s daughter, is a devotee
of the faith, having confidence in the Pure Mind.
The faith unites all men with God, truth, and right-
mindedness.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas. 53.4

The faith enjoins that each person does the task
assigned to him, so that the radiant heritage of the
pure mind may come to all who follow the faith.



--- Page 210 ---

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas. 53.5

These words are spoken to young girls who are
getting married and to their young men — bring the
Pure Mind down to your own minds, and let each
one strive to surpass the other in truth and high-
mindedness, which will surely bring rich rewards.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas. 53.6

In life on Earth, these truths hold good. Do not go
astray because of attractive lures which take you
away from your true self, and obscure the life of the
spirit. Evil persons despise the truth and prevent all
spiritual growth.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas. 53.7

The reward of the Magha brotherhood awaits the
united couple. But should you choose to leave this
brotherhood, deluded by the evil spirit, your end
will surely be in grief and words of woe.

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas. 53.8

All evil persons who have been deceived into being
evil shall chide themselves, but may our young
men and women live by these eternal truths, and
may peace descend upon our happy people. May
Zarathustra, the greatest, lead us all again, for he
has surmounted death.


--- Page 211 ---

VAHISTA ISTI - Yas. 53.9

Being slaves to their own passions, those who are evil
are filled with hatred and struggle with themselves.
They hate those who are good. Who will oppose
such persons with everything at his command? O
Lord, it is through Your power that You give to the
righteous meek the ultimate reward.


--- Page 212 ---



--- Page 213 ---



--- Page 214 ---



--- Page 215 ---



--- Page 216 ---



--- Page 217 ---



--- Page 218 ---



--- Page 219 ---



--- Page 220 ---



--- Page 221 ---



--- Page 222 ---



--- Page 223 ---



--- Page 224 ---



--- Page 225 ---



--- Page 226 ---



--- Page 227 ---



--- Page 228 ---



--- Page 229 ---



--- Page 230 ---



--- Page 231 ---



--- Page 232 ---



--- Page 233 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.2

Listen with your ears most attentively. Consider,
clearly, what I have to say. Choose before deciding
— man for man, each for himself, before this great
new age is ushered in. Each one of you, awaken to
this message.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 30.11

If you understand these principles which God
has laid down for man - happiness and misery -
punishment of a long duration for those who are
evil, and upward progress for those who are good
— happiness will be your lot.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 31.7

Who, through that first word, brought light down to
us from heavenly light? Who, through his wisdom,
is the creator of truth? The upholder of the highest
(mentally). That light does then brighten within us,
which has otherwise remained dormant till now.


--- Page 234 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.12

Unfold Yourself within me, O Lord. Grant me
strength of character through Right-Mindedness.
Through the holiest spirit, O Lord, grant me
goodness as a reward for prayer. Grant me a life full
of vigour through Truth, and may the Pure Mind
look after me.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.13

Give me bliss, make me far-seeing and reveal to
me your incomparable gifts - Your power, and
the blessings of the Pure Mind. O Holy Right-
Mindedness, teach us clearly as to how truth guides
our way of thinking.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 33.14

Therefore, Zarathustra offers himself and_ his
upliftment to God, and dedicates the first fruits
of his thought inspired by the loftiest motives, his
deeds of truth, and his words uttered according to
his conscience - in effect, his whole being.

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.6

Since You are such in reality, O Lord, Truth and
Pure Mind, guide me when doubts arise, at every
stage of life, so that Your worshipper is free from the
load which ultimately weighs the soul down.


--- Page 235 ---

AHUNAVAITI - Yas. 34.13

That path, O Lord, which You pointed out to me - the
creed of all saviours — that every good deed inspired
by lofty motives alone, goes far. This teaching is for
the clear-sighted, leading to the ultimate reward
which You will grant.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.1

Happiness to him who gives happiness to
whomsoever else. May God, who rules at will, grant
this. I wish for progress, strength of character and
life renewed. For upholding truth, grant to me, O
Right-Mindedness, the blessings of a life spent with
a mind illumined by light.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 43.5

I have realized that You are holy, O Lord, when I
recognized that You were the first, even before life
came into being. You have ordained that all words
and deeds will bear fruit. Misery to those who are
evil, and the blessings of well-being to those who
are good. Thus shall it be till the ultimate goal of
creation is reached.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.7

To all seekers of salvation, past, present, and future,
I have this to say: the soul of the righteous will be
victorious and will gain immortality. Ever renewed
are times of trouble for those who are evil. This is
sent by God through His power.


--- Page 236 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.8

Him do I seek to praise, in all humility. Indeed, I
have seen him with my mind’s eye. By good thought,
deed, and word, and by knowledge brought by the
path of truth have I perceived God Himself. Let
us, therefore, offer songs of devotion to Him in the
abode of song where God dwells.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 45.9

God and the Pure Mind do I seek to worship, who
in His plan has made for us both good and its
opposite, evil. God’s power has made us serve our
human flock, so that they advance to the highest
truth and wisdom.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.5

Whoever, being in a position of strength, receives
any person in kindness or in friendship, and
whoever receives anybody because he is a follower
of Your revelation, is blessed; and even if such a
person, being righteous, receives an evil person, he
should teach him the path to salvation to save him
from destruction, O Lord.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.6

But, whoever being able to do so, does not do so,
shall himself be ensnared by evil. Because he who
is good to those who are evil is himself evil. And
he who befriends the righteous is himself righteous.
This is Your law ever since You first created us.


--- Page 237 ---

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.7

Who, O Lord, will protect me when evil persons
threaten me with violence, who other than Your fire
and the Pure Mind? When they both are at work
within me, truth prevails, O Lord. Declare this
clearly so that I may understand this philosophical
truth.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.8

Whoever is violent to life, his deeds of flaming hate
will not touch me but will recoil on him, this which
keeps him from the good life, but not from hateful
evil ways.

USTAVAITI - Yas. 46.19

Whoever will accomplish through truth and His will
this complete renovation on earth for Zarathustra,
to him will be given the reward of eternal life,
together with all that he desires from our bountiful
Mother Earth. All this You did reveal to me, O Lord,
the Most Wise.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.1

Since on Judgement Day truth triumphs over
untruth - when a person attains immortality,
which has been said to be a delusion - then will the
devotees of many Gods and other people who will
witness this increase their devotion to You, O Lord.


--- Page 238 ---

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.7

Keep hatred far away and steel yourselves against
violence, those of you who wish to cling onto the
best wisdom. To increase truth, be in the company
of holy men, who will lead such persons to Your
abode, O Lord.

SPENTA MAINYU - Yas. 48.12

Such are the saviours of this land, who are guided
by the Pure Mind’s wisdom. Because of their deeds
of truth and their teachings of God and the spread
of the divine message, hatred will be vanquished.

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.4

Which shepherd will look after your worshipper?
When will compassion take over? When will Truth
take over? And when will Right-Mindedness do the
same? Where is the highest mind and Your power,
O God?

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.5

Questioning about all these as to how he should
advance life in truth, the Protector, upright in his
deeds, acquires good insight through humility. He
is the true guide to those who are wise, bringing
them blessings.


--- Page 239 ---

VOHU KSHATREM - Yas. 51.6

Whosoever proves himself to be better than good,
thus fulfilling life's purpose, will be helped by God’s
power. But it shall be worse than bad for him who
does not do so at the final end of life.



--- Page 240 ---



--- Page 241 ---

