

--- Page 1 ---

Pray to Him who wields the bow and arrow (for the
vindication of justice) and possesses all the balms (is the
only source of bliss).

For the sake of beatitude, worship Rudra: Serve Him
with salutes,

He is both the Deva (God of the Hindus) and the
Asura (Ahura, God of the Parsis),

Rudra is one, He does not tolerate a second.

Mazda alone is the adorable-most.

Mahat (—Mazat) constitutes the Asurahood (divinity)

of all the dévas,



--- Page 2 ---

-— =
ae

All the worlds know Him; and they give to Varuna, Attain that, by Conscience, by Re en and by love.
e name, “Vedhas” (Mazda). sy love, as'di i
ig - ae t) By love, as distinct from’ mere obedience

Then (in India) Vishnu approached Indra, for the
sake of communion—the greater one assimilated the great

one—Vedhas (Mazda) won over the Aryans of Trisadha

( Bactria, Media and Persia ) and led the devotee to Recti-

7

tude.

’
: / P. ~i Ge te vu 4 Lis heieiida, t .

He, the Ahura, lords it over the devas. 7 Phe authority of \ ij srother, the father.

Wh ‘
When shall’ TI, Mazda, walk along with you, and how will

your ecstasy be mine, tel


--- Page 3 ---

I would discharge the duties of both the Deva-Ya‘ha
(Deva-Yasna) and the Pitri-Ya‘na (Mazda-Yasna).

Then Brahma bowed down to glorious Hari-Medhas
(Ahura-Mazda), and learnt from him, the best religion, with

all its principles and secrets.

Hari-Medhas (Ahura-Mazda) is the Soul of consciousness

and the root of knowledge. He is both personal and im-

personal, and One who always views the world—we bow

to Him.



--- Page 4 ---

is the greatest good. The good doese

Rectitude should be f

Virtue for the sake of virtue, and not

anything else, (like ple



--- Page 5 ---

Just as God is to be adored, so is the Prophet, and that by

(the Prophet who is) the up-
holder cf (1) Conscience, for the sake of the deeds of life

towards Mazda, and of (2) Nonchalance, in the cause of

the Lord; and whom the Lord appointed as the saviour

of the pious.



--- Page 6 ---

uae,

to point out t



--- Page 7 ---



--- Page 8 ---

May the Amesha

Spentas (sacred institutes) accept the Gathas. Salutation

to the sacred Gathas,

unto You,



--- Page 9 ---



--- Page 10 ---

Hf the world were not narrow, why: is ell: this: laments; Whom do you intend as her lord, as one who can thwart

tion? Why does one become more bent with grief, the the violence of the wicked i

longer he lives in the world

Then the Creator of the world (Mazda) asked Asha
(Rectitude) “Where is thy Prophet for the world who, capa-
ble, world-fosterer and vigorous, would sustain her always ?



--- Page 11 ---

The problem of evilleads to the question as to what

the end of life is. If pleasure is the only end, then righteous- |
ness has no place in the economy of life, for rightousness
consists in resisting the temptations of pleasure. So the
matter is referred to Asha (Rectitude),

Virtue and vice cannot have the same consequences.

Though the virtuous apparently suffer, they are going

nearer to Mazda, and would attain perfect happiness at
the end. Only a prophet can induce this convi-tion, and
sO an enquiry is made about the Prophet. Jalal, the Apostle
of Sufism (cisti or esotric principles of Mazda Yasna ) tells

us how the Prophet is the agent of Mazda on earth.



--- Page 12 ---

To Him replied Asha, ‘There is, in the world, not a hero
who is ( himself) free from arrogance. Of them I know

not one, who can make the lowly great. Of these beings,

he is the real worthy, to whom the call of duty reaches.”

Asbha replies that there is no one perfectly righteous.
Yet that is not a matter for utter despair. For if
one sincerely tries to walk in the path of duty, that is
enough to bring him redemption. Misery and pain do not
sway him. No one is free from fault ; if one sticks to duty

that is enough merit.

ee



--- Page 13 ---

hereafter, He, Ahura, is the Judge thereof. Let it be unto
us as He wills.

Heretofore he took orders from the king, . Thereafter

he could give commands to the soldiers.

Mazda alone is the most adorable. Whatever has been

done heretofore by men and devas, or will be done

;
ee



--- Page 14 ---

Ethics leads to religion, for Mazda is the source of
rectitude. If man had not been made what he is, if he had
not been provided with conscience, he would not have
made any distinction between the right and the wrong ;

there would not have been any course of duty for him,

just as there is none for the beasts. So we must look to

the source, and learn that Mazda is the sole adorable—

He alone can rectify evil.



--- Page 15 ---

Then so, with out-stretched hands, invoking the grace

ef the Lord, my soul and that of the living world,

approached Mazda with this request “May there not be

adversity for the honest, nor prosperity for the dishonest.”



--- Page 16 ---

Virtue does not necessarily lead to adversity and vice
does not necessarily bring in prosperity. Even judged by
the worldly standard, there is no reason to give up the

course of virtue.
Souls (of Rectitude and the World) want to know what
the real value of morality is, in the scheme of the universe.
Gatha seeks to deepen this conviction in the final

victory of virtue. through the grace of Mazda. Mazda

does so ordain that “out of evil cometh good.”

He who brings forth rose from the very midst of thorns

is also able to turn the autumn into spring.

Thereupon Ahura Mazda, surveying the

world with

insight or circumspection spoke, “There does not exist a

single prince, nor a Prophet, (who lives) for the sake of

Rectitude. Therefore indeed the creator has moulded you

(Zarathushtra) for their progress and protection.”



--- Page 17 ---

The busy world is apt to forget the most important

lesson of life. So merciful Mazda sends Prophets now and

then to remind men of their highest destiny.



--- Page 18 ---

Then Ahura Mazda, in harmony with Asha, ordained
the matiram (the scripture) for him (the Prophet) Salvation

for the World, and sacred laws for the Saints. But wheres

2

is that Conscience, which alone can impart all these things

to the mortals 2



--- Page 19 ---

bring salvation to mankind. But unless man has the good-

will to accept the gospel, it does not benefit him at all,

Gatha is the best of the scriptures. Where is there
any other book which points out the end of life so lueidly

and is thus the primal gospel 7

If { do not read these, what else would I read ?

Mezda gives to the Prophet, the Scripture. The Scrip-

ture. containing the lessons of the prophet, is his mai

instrument. It lays down the rules and regulations which



--- Page 20 ---

He, Spitama Zarathustra, is here known tome as one

whoalone listens to my directions. He desires me-Mazda,

and Rectitude. This is why, for preaching Rectitude, I

have conferred on him the status of the Prophet.



--- Page 21 ---

Bhagavan Zarathushtra is the first and the foremost of
all the Prophets, He raised the first voice of protest against
the divorce of morality and Religion, in the then current

Vedic Religion.

He alone who is commissioned by Mazda can lead a

nation.

One should surrender himself completely to Maha ratu

Zarathushtra, even as Moses did.
5

When this Ancient one calls you, submit to him.
For even Moses took orders from Khizr ( Zarathustra).
Khizr is the green-mantled prophet of ancient Iran,

| who inspired Hafiz and all the Sufi poets of Persia.

j ( Thereupon the Soul of the World Iamented: “in this
disaster, when I long for a master-hero, (alas) that T would
get (cnly) the feeble voice of an impotent man. O when
would he come, he who can give me the protection of his

i able arms ?”

ee
;
)



--- Page 22 ---

It is not wisdom to attach too much importance to
physical strength. One who cannot control himself,

how can he control others? They know not that it is the

way of Mazda to conquer without the help of the sword.

He kills without the sword, t. e. changes the heart.



--- Page 23 ---

Oh Ahura, do Ye give to them (all men), as strength,

Rectitude and Nonchalance, and (also give) such Conscience,

as holds (chooses) security and peace. May I too, O Mazda,

recognize You to be the highest object of knowledge



--- Page 24 ---

When would Rectitude, Conscience, and Non-Chalance

come tome?  Dothou, oh Mazda, youchsafe Equity tor

this great Magha (Chtrch), Oh Ahura, for our protection

come speedily with Thy graces.

6



--- Page 25 ---

The basis of Rectitude is JJ Equity. —equal treat-
ment to all. Do unto others what you would do unto

yourself, Equity is the foundation of a corporate life, a

united church (Magha).



--- Page 26 ---

tial element) of Mazda, (ii) all the deeds of holy Rectitude. | element) of Mazda, (ii) all the deeds of holy Rectitude

a
nd (iti) the Duties inculcated by Conscience, so that I may

indeed satisfy (serve) the soul of the world.

Now saluting, and with out-spread hands, I would,

first of all, entreat for (1) Bliss ( which is) the Manyu fessen-



--- Page 27 ---

How can sugar ever be devoid of sweetness 7

The’saints are not only always joyful themselves, but

their very presence makes others joyous,



--- Page 28 ---

Oh Mazda, to me, who approach you through Cons-
cience, grant the gain of both the selves—of the tangible
(i, e. the Lower ) self, as well as of that, which is the
spiritual (i. e. the Higher ) self, so that the aspirant, may

through ectitude, persist in holiness.

Recognition of two planes of Consciousmess—Mind and

Soul, the introspected consciousness and the introspecting

consciousness, is the basis of religious philosophy. Mind

(introspected consciousness) is always the play thing of the
two opposite forces of pleasure and pain. The soul is
above the reach of these two opposite currents. Thus it is
ever delightful—always satisfied, in its status as the witness

of the mind,

The first lesson that a'saint teaches to the disciple, is to



--- Page 29 ---

Gita gives to the two intellects, the names of Kshara and
Akshara.

: oes P Browards me, Who weave (compose hymns) wonder-
The existence of two Selfs is ponited out by Jalal as — ; i i Z s

foll ‘ { fully, unto, (i) You, Oh Rectitude, (ii) unto Conscience,
follows,

and (iii) unto Ahura Mazda, because of all Whom (i. e. by
whose grace) Faith develops unfailing Nonchalance, towards
me, do please come, to my bliss,

There are two Selfs in you, my friend—one lofty as the

high heaven, and the other low as the deep sea,



--- Page 30 ---

Tt is futile to expect delight except from Mazda ie
until one believes that, Mazda really exists and that He

is our greatest Friend.

One gets peace only when he has known God.

As the Gita says

1, who have, by means of Conscience, well-restored the
soul to its own abode (the function of introspection), and

am aware of the benefits: of the deeds of Ahura Mazda, I

shall, so long as I may and can, exhort for the pursuit of
Rectitude.



--- Page 31 ---



--- Page 32 ---

Oh Rectitude, when will I be able to find you, and

to know Conscience, and also Devotion, which is the way

to Ahura Mazda, the most beneficent ; and when with this
Evangel, we shall be able, by our tongue, to reclaim greatly

the perverts.



--- Page 33 ---

him dwell on these features, in order to realise the dignity

of man,
Even the hooligans are amenable to the appeal of virtue
and ifthe demand of Rectitude is often repeated to them

it would ultimately change their heart,

The gentle pen is more powerful than the sword.

the features

Rectitude, Conscience and Godliness,
that distinguish mankind from the animal-world,——human

stranger in this world, his true

7
5

being, from Nature. A

citizenship is in the ethical and ideal sphere, and so!



--- Page 34 ---

Come, ne enth alse with Conscience,

holding long life.
strongly Zarathushtra,

may $

and give us Rectitude-

By your noble maxims Mazda, enthuse

and these others as well, so that we

mash the opposition of the enemy.

Conscience is the first factor of the moral life. Through

Conscience, Mazda sustains the aspirant.

A conscientious ( virtuous ) man can convert the enemy

into a friend

Hew the figure of a friend, out of stone.



--- Page 35 ---

Oh Rectitude, give us that excellence which is the
teward of Conscience, Oh Faith, grant to Vistaspa and to
myself, our wish. Oh Mazda, You too, do give and flourish,
those Mantras, which we hear, lead to attainment ( God-

realistion ).

What we lack is an earnest desire | for the

vision of Mazda. If the desire were very strong in-us, it

would have found out the means of achievement. ( Where

there is a will, there is a way ). Our primary task is to

make the desire strong.



--- Page 36 ---

When you are really thirsty,

you water,

Mazda is sure to give

This one (myself), being at his best (Purity), would
realise You, the best (Deity), with Rectitude, the best
(faculty). I, beloving, would worship Ahura, for manly
Frashoshtra, and for me, as well as for those, to whom You

consign Conscience, for all time.



--- Page 37 ---

Do not regard the fact that thou art low and infirm.

Look to thy aspiration (ideal), o noble one. Stick to

your ideal, and you will reach your highest end.

Mazda lies latent in every bedy. The highest end of
of human life is to realise Him to meke Him real (patent).
This is to be done by means cf Rectitude. The holiera
man becomes, the fitter he becomes for the manifestation
of Mazda—ti) through him, (to others), as well as (ii) for

the vision of Mazda, by him.



--- Page 38 ---

With these lauds, oh Ahura Mazda, we would adore You,
and (adore) Rectitude too, and the Best (i.e. Social) Con-
science, as we flock to the Congregation, to praise. You

are the most adorable ; send us the firmness of Love.

The strength of one becomes the strength of the rest.

Each one becomes a cup-bearer to the rest.



--- Page 39 ---

Whom-so You teach the Law of Rectitude and
Conscience, to them you speedily make their wishes

successful. Thus-sol know you to be Un-deficient, and

elegant-famed in glory.



--- Page 40 ---

A religious man is afraid of the burden of endless desires.
But Mazda fulfils the few noble desires that a pious man

happens to entertain.

So that [ may thereby uphold Rectitude and Con-
science for all time, Oh You Mazda, do teach me with your

own words, From ( the region of ) the Manyus “( i. e. from

Phenomena ) | would come up to you ( Noumenon ), as it

had been, prior to the ( creation of ) life.



--- Page 41 ---

Man attains primal peace, when the illusion of the world

ceases, and he fixes his eye on the noumenon, in the midst

of phenomena.



--- Page 42 ---



--- Page 43 ---

Now I shall proclaim to those who have assembled here,

all that is to be learnt from Mazda, viz the hymns of the

Lord, the imperatives of Conscience, and what noble~prin-

cipled Rectitude is, which by its light, reveals Beatitude.



--- Page 44 ---

Maha Ratu Zarathustra proceeds to announce the great
truths, that he had learnt from Ahura Mazda. This recalls

to us the scene where Maharsi Swetaswatara spoke to the

congregation of saints, the highest secrets that he had

learnt from God.

Hear the best with your ears, and discern by pure mind :
Choose “‘the ought,’ man by man (every man), for his own
self, Before the great trial (comes), wake up to this my

counsel,



--- Page 45 ---

Prophets can only instruct. It is for us to follow.

t is better to think over the problem of life in cooler

Moments, and thus equip oneself for facing the challenge

of circumstances.



--- Page 46 ---

Now (there are) those two primordial Manyus (Gunas,

Forces), which are said to be co-relative and co-ordinate,
in thought, word and deed,—one is the better one, and

the other is the bad. Of these two, the wise choose the

right one, but not the fools.



--- Page 47 ---

When these two Manyus (Gunas) came into contact, they

created motion as well as inertia, which, ultimately in life,

came to be the worst mind (malignance) in the vicious, and

the best mind (consciencé) in the virtuous,



--- Page 48 ---



--- Page 49 ---



--- Page 50 ---



--- Page 51 ---

Out of these two Manyus (Gunas), the dishonest man

chooses the worst acts, whilst the holiest (man) chooses the

righteous Manyu; who (thus) wears the hardest stone



--- Page 52 ---



--- Page 53 ---

Of them two, the Deva-worshippers do not see aright,

as they proceed to worship by way of deification ( attribu-
tion of divinity to insignificant things). Because they
choose the narrowest mentality, they glide to infatuation

(foolish passions), which is calculated to deflect the life of

the mortals.



--- Page 54 ---



--- Page 55 ---

To the other one, (he who does not take to Deva

Yasna) comes Nonchalance, Conscience and Rectitude,

and Unflinching Faith brings about corporation and

solidarity. Such happens to them as is (ie. befits) the
metal, with which He (Mazda) had built them in the

beginning.



--- Page 56 ---

The wise man pays attention to essential things—non
chalance, conscience, rectitude, faith, and unity. He
thereby gets rid of affectation and reverts to simplicity,
which is the natural instinct of man.

Rectitude is inborn to man—it is in his build.

My wings have grown out of my very essence. I did

not stick two wings on me by means of glue.

And when frenzy goes out of the these sinners, then

Mazda, with the help of conscience, inspires in them non-

chalance. Ahura (Himself) instructs them, who give the

Evil up unto the hands of Rectitude.



--- Page 57 ---

The sinner however is not lost for ever. As soon as he
gets rid of his passion, he develops conscience and non-
chalance, and thus opens himself up to the influence of

Mazda and is saved.

hey, who, going to reno-

O Ahura Mazda, may we be t



--- Page 58 ---

{

i\
vate their life, choose Fraternity and Rectitude. For the
mind turns towords the glimpse of the goal.

Rectitude and Fraternity are the outward signs of a

renovated life.

When aman is born twice, he plants his foot upon the

head of all causes ( i. e. laws of nature ).



--- Page 59 ---

Then forthwith happens the collapse of the inflation of
the accursed Devil, and the purest ones are fastened to the
cord of Conscience, ( they ) who strive for the good prizes

of Mazda and Rectitude,

In his heart of hearts, man detests falsehood and

foves truth. Thus Evil cannot hold him in bondage for

ever. This relieving feature is the seed of the collapse of
the Devil. Such collapse is bound to ensue, since moral
order or Asa, is the truth of the very structure of the

universe. HEyen malice is rooted in love.



--- Page 60 ---

These two Selves (the Lower and the Higher Self)
that Mazda assigned, Ye mortals, stimulate Right and

Wrong (respectively), which awards misery to the dishonest,

and happiness to the honest, yet by all these welfare



--- Page 61 ---

Evil is not wholly evil. In tackling it, the soul acquires

moral strength, ie. competence for nearness to God This

is the relieving feature of sin.



--- Page 62 ---

Recollect with your mind; I shall proclaima message
that has not been heard before. It is the best for those,

who on account of fiendish mentality, devastate the regions

of Rectitude, as well as the best for those, who are devoted

to Mazda.



--- Page 63 ---

In order that thereby we may know firmly the “way “

of the Soul’, we flock toyou, Ahura, as to a preceptor, to

learn. Mazda, tell us how we may live in Rectitude.



--- Page 64 ---

Mazda is the only preceptor; for all our worldly

preceptors get their inspiration from Him. If He did not,
out of kindness, disclose Himself to man, none could have

reasoned up to Him,



--- Page 65 ---

The mentality and the light that you confer on Thy

votaries, the bliss that you inspire in them, the task that



--- Page 66 ---

In order that Rectitude may be my resource. O Ye



--- Page 67 ---

Ahura Mazda, I wish for holy faith, through best con-

science : I wish for me also firm nonchalance, with whose

help I would expunge the evil.

Sages hold Faith to be the mark of spiritual life.



--- Page 68 ---

Tell me, your disciple, as to how Rectitute can ayail me

the better. I would know through Conscience, and me-

ditate, which way lies my welfare, and (know) all that also

Ahura Mazda. which has been, and all that which will be.

Until one is convinced that Rectitute is for his own



--- Page 69 ---

good, he can not be truly virtuous. This leads to the
philosophical question, as to how the world came to be,
and if the world is a mere passing show. The Universe did
not start from azero, If it was a zero, it wassuch a zero
that the cosmos lay latent in it; it was pregnant with
the whole universe. If the world did not come out of a
Zero, if cannot pass into a zero. There is some thing posi-
tive in the backstound, whatever its nature may be.
The source of our lifeisan Eternal Verity, that cannot be

argued away, as the Pancadasi s

May the best happen to the sage, who preaches my

principle, that consists of Spirituality, Rectitute and Godliness.
That which He lends to Consience;-is so much Mazda's own

strength.



--- Page 70 ---

Conscience enables one to repel the seductions of plea-
sure. It is the power of Mazda that manifests itself

i i ; : : Who-so realises it (the principle) to be the foremost
through conscience. The voice of conscience is the voice

£ God (asset), shines by the lustre of holiness. The best con-
of God.



--- Page 71 ---

Conscience is the determinant of Duty, The dictate

of conscience is the same for all. It does not ask one to

speak the truth and another to tell a lic. The supremacy

of Conscience should be duly recognised, Customs should

not over-rule Conscience, as the Mahabharata says

Conscience dose not vary with circumstances.

Conscience is not now this and now that,



--- Page 72 ---

Hea njoy peac mind who i swayed
a, when I beheld you with eyes, I
by passions:

at once
realised You to be the ever-adorable mind, the father of

Conscience, the real sour of Rectitude, and the Lord of
the actions of life.

Rage rules over Kings, and I rule over rage.



--- Page 73 ---

In his magnificence, Mazda is the

normal order of the universe.

gracious support of the

It is You, who created Faith, and it is You who created
the World as well as Duty, by Your Energy, O Ahura
Mazda. This is how you prescribe the path, both for him
who proceeds by activity, as well as for him, who is not

active.



--- Page 74 ---



--- Page 75 ---

Now of those two (activity and reclusion), choose acti-

vity which is, for one’s self, edifying. It is magnificent,
moral and promotive of Conscience. © Mazda, the

deceitful inactive one does not derive the benefit of Japa.



--- Page 76 ---

Because O Mazda, You fashioned for us, from the
beginning, both matter and thought, and You (fashioned)
mind and duty, and You gave the up-mind, along with a

frame, and (You created) deeds and words, wherein (freedom

of) choice has been given to the will—[it is better to choose
activity].



--- Page 77 ---

Duty does not exceed one's ability. None ¢an be held

responsible for not flying in the sky.

ft is no good living in the world of imagination alone.

Mind is enclosed ina sai and we must face the actual
facts of life.

If the mind alone would have sufficed the material world
would not have been created,

Freedom of will is the postulate of moral life. It is be-
cause a man can turn either to the right or to the left
(as he chooses) that responsibility can be fixed on him.

“Ought” implies “can”



--- Page 78 ---

Whether he is truthful or liar, whether he is ignorant or Everybody has a philosophy of life, whether it is con-

wise, a man utters words in accordance with his heart and sciously present in his mind or not.
>

He fixes up something
mind. Faith forthwith directs energy where the goal lies. | as the object of his life, and strives therefor. Without some

such object he cannot live foraday. The only difference
between the wise and the foolish is this, that the foal | |
of the former is based on rational considerations, while that

of the latter is merely instinctive.



--- Page 79 ---

That quest which is sought openly, or that (purpose)

which is sought secretly, and how a sinful man courses to

misfortune,—all these, whether right or wrong, you see with

your keen eyes.

The worth of an action depends not on outward confor-
mity with the moral laws but on the motive which cannot

be concealed from Mazda. Nothing is hidden from Mazda.



--- Page 80 ---

When two persons conspire together, Varuna is present

as the third person to hear it. ; ;
This I ask you, Ahura, as to what will come and what will

go, and what requital for deeds would be given to the pious,

and what to the impious, and how that will be, which is

for the equifactor.

The motive of a man is apparent to Him like a thread

of hair in pure milk.



--- Page 81 ---

This I ask You, O Ahura: what is the punishment

for him who furnishes strength to the mischievous rogue,

It cannot be that the consequences of a good deed and
those of a bad deed, would be the same. They are sure to

the sinner who does not know the way to live without
yield different results.

injuring the men and the cattle of worker.

If you want to eat cakes, you should procure sugar.



--- Page 82 ---

Restrain the abettor, and the thief will be disabled.

He should

It does not suffice if one 1s himself virtuous.

not also lend support to the vicious. ‘Mercy but murders

pardoning those that kill.’

I would ask You this, as to how is he, the wise man who

organises the strength of the house-hcld, the village, and the
»¢ M



--- Page 83 ---

Righteous warfare makes a man godly

One should organise the strensth of the nation for the

resistance of the villains

Mazda repelis the Evil

Affinity with God is established by righteous warfare.

God created us in His image : Our qualities should take

fesson from Him.



--- Page 84 ---

May the sage tell the learner, as to which of them two,
the pious or the impious, chooses the greater ( i. e¢. makes
the better choice ). Let not the ignorant mislead. Guide

us.O Mazda, the Director of Conscience.

One should take his lesson from Mazda alone, and from no

one. else.

Always go to the highest court.

Mazda will speak through your conscience



--- Page 85 ---

Let not any of you lend ear to the creed and canon of
the knave, and let him not thus put your house and district,
your village and country, to disaster and ruin. Anon, resist
him with weapons.



--- Page 86 ---

The villains bring ruin, not only on themselves, but on
the whole nation. Virtue consists in promoting the welfare

of the world.

O Ahura. one who listenns to and thinks over Rectitude.

who is wise and has entered into (i. ¢. realised ) his seif, who

has control over his tongue and is efficient in truthful

expression of words,—-O “Mazda through your bright light,

place that votary in welfare.



--- Page 87 ---

The righteous man goes on steadily making progress by the (ast steadily making progress by the
light of God.

But one who proceeds to deceive an honest man, will
ave another habitat, viz long gloomy life, evil food ( (thous
and remorseful words. The devils, by their own ak
indeed, lead their soul away from religion.

The aspirant who listens to the counsel of Mazda,

receives more of His grace,



--- Page 88 ---



--- Page 89 ---

ms

7 ‘rant spirituality and immortality, :
May Ahura Mazda grant spirituality an

‘ 7 anit ect 2, com-=
d on account of the wealth of plentiful Rectitude, co
an é

: > the er of
sand over nonchalance as well, to the upholde
i

i is character and
fence, one who is dear to Him for his character an
conscience, ; ]

deeds.

One who is faithful to his conscience, does not fail te
get all the gifts of Mazda.

Conscience is like a lamp in the hand, in a dark night.



--- Page 90 ---

Evident is all this to the intelligent, as much as to the

observant with attention. He pursues Rectitude and good

nonchalance in words and deeds. He, O Mazda Ahura,

is Thy strongest believer.



--- Page 91 ---



--- Page 92 ---

Him the Khaetu (Vaishya) worships, and Him the

Verejena (Kshatriya), along with the Aryamna (Brahmin)
ly

worship. In my mind there isi the Love of Mazda (and not

mere forma! compliance). I have come as your Messenger.

F would chastise them who deny You.



--- Page 93 ---

4

The cult of love is not the good fortune of every religion,

It is pre-eminently the way of the Parsis.

‘This is the wine of the Maghas, and can be sipped only

To them, guiding by Conscience and Nonchalance,

Ahura Mazda intimated, “Active Rectitude is your good
friend’.

Po “We welcome holy noble Faith.

Let that be ours’,

in the company of the Maghas.’



--- Page 94 ---

Cloistered virtue is not what Maha Ratu Zarathushtra
teache-s, but active beneficence, ever ready for the service

humanity.

“Virtue is not a matter of thoughts and words. It must

find expression in acts.



--- Page 95 ---

© all ye Daevas, you are the progeny of the evil mind.
(i. e. the out-come of the imagination of simpletons).

Whoever serves you fondly, serves only inequity and error.

Your deceit spreads all around, for which you are heard

(known) all the seven worlds over.

Maha-Ratu Zarathushtra points out the defect of Deva
Yasna. These people fix their attention on rituals and
ceremonies, and not on the love of Mazda. Love of Mazda
is the life of religion, and without that, the dead ceremonials

are worse than useless.



--- Page 96 ---

If Hari is loved, what is the need of rituals? if Hari is

not loved, what is the good of rituals ?

You have brought this to pass that those, alas, who are
the worst of men, are called “the favourites of the Devas—"
those who recede from Conscience, and do not continue in

the duty of Ahura Mazda and Rectitude.



--- Page 97 ---

The Deva-worshippers pay little heed to formation

of character. But as the Katha Upanisad points out, it is

impossible to attain Mazda without forming character.

If this is religion, may the world come to an end today.

pen tee) o
You have thereby defrauded mankind of good lif. d
imir ortality (Godliness) ot yours is the evil m nd .
f . For rs is the evil mi
that is devilish vi i I : Ns B x
1z. evil mentality, and evi deed d word

Z evil deeds a ;

by which you lead the vicious to ruin “u



--- Page 98 ---

Itt

ded told, that they become. O Ahura, whose recollection is
the moral laws are disregarded.
S “ ~

auspicious, inspire in us the best (i.e. social) conscience.
Instruct us in Your nonchalance and rectitude, we like to
know.



--- Page 99 ---



--- Page 100 ---

Of these sinners, no savant approves the method—the

policy (method) which is said to be, which is heard to be,

(the law) of sharp steel, of whose futility O Mazda, You

are the best cognisant.



--- Page 101 ---

The principle of sharp steel ( might is right) cannot be

consistently carried out.

When a thief is himself robbed, he realises the folly (of

might is right) and seeks the protection of law.



--- Page 102 ---



--- Page 103 ---

Vivaswan Yima also is said to be one of these sinners—
he who, eager to please our mankind alone, neglected the
brood of the cattle. This their selfishness too, O Mazda

You know well.

The religion of Bhagavan Zarathustra is catholic enough

to include the good of the animals also within its purview.



--- Page 104 ---

Seeing that life is equally dear to every creature, one

should not afflict any creature—should cease from frightening

or teasing.

The Gita lays considerable importance on the principle

of seeing God in every creature.

He who sees Me in every creature, becomes My own,

whatever else he may or may not do.

The false prohet distorts the traditions. He, by his
counsels, (distorts) the duties of life. He takes away from
me, my welfare the noble pursuit of Conscience. So
tell me about the (good) Manyu. Mazda, I beseech you

for Rectitude.



--- Page 105 ---

[ tell you, with all emphasis, that there is moral order in

the universe. One who doubts duty, gradually degenerates

iuto a brute

There is certainly a safe resort in the universe.

He also distorts -my lore, who declares it to be most
improper, to see with the eyes (simultaneously), both the
earth and the sun (mundane and religious affairs), he who
gives his aid to the vicious, repudiates activism, and hurls

afflictions on the pious.



--- Page 106 ---

It is foolish to think that one has to forsake the world

in order to realise God.

Poverty, in itself, does not lead to salvation, nor does

property, in itself, lead to bondage.

Do not give away Mazda's property without the per-

mission cf Mazda.



--- Page 107 ---

They also vitiate my judgment,—those wicked people

who consider the avaricious man and the avaricious woman
to be great, who over-exert for the aquisition of wealth,

and deflect the mind of the righteous, O Mazda, from all
that is the best,



--- Page 108 ---

Those who, by their suggestions, seduce men from the best
deeds, Mazda calls them vile—he who instigates men to
approach the world with the tenet of hedonism, wherefor

the Grehmas choose other than Rectitude,

and Karpas
choose hurtful and oppressive nonchalance (i. é. cynicism).



--- Page 109 ---



--- Page 110 ---

That nonchalance (cynicism) which Grehma incul-
cates and which leads to the abode of the worst mind, and
which is the cancer of one’s life, and which, O Mazda,

inflames hedonism—He who protects the Messenger of Your

Gospel, from such (cynicism), reveals (to him) what true
Rectitude is.



--- Page 111 ---



--- Page 112 ---

Neither Grehma would happen to him ( come to his
rescue ) nor Kayis lend any strength, and all his undertakings

would go contrary—he who seeks the patronage of the

rogues. For they who ( like Kavi and Grehma ) take

recourse to Duta-Osha ( casuistry ), teach only to leave the

world to itself ( and not to help it on ).



--- Page 113 ---

The sensualist brings ruin on himself ; how can he serve

to help others ?

Those who-are the followers of Kavi and. Karpa, ruin

themselves, by this and that (i.e. by everything ) while

those who steadily stick to the lasting asset of life ( viz
Rectitude ), are by those very things ( this and that ), carried
to the abode of the Higher Self,



--- Page 114 ---

The man who sticks to a principle, succeeds in Iie.

One who has no principle, fails every where, for he has no

firm stand, and is carried away by the blast of the moment.

Rectitude killed, will kill you, and rectitude saved, will

save.



--- Page 115 ---

Certainly it is best that I would cast off my own selfish-

ness, O Ahura Mazda, so that there may be, for me, the

end of all duplicity. Foreven the vile rogues wish this

( equality ) in the inmost of their hearts.



--- Page 116 ---



--- Page 117 ---

Just as one is, so awards to him, the fittest action (te-

tribution), the Great Ratus, who is the bestower of the
foremost life—to the vicious, as well as to the virtuous, and

to him, whose falsehood counterbalances all that is true
in him.

The Law of Karma is inexorable—every one has to reap
what he sows. This law indicates the justice of Mazda.
In awarding recompenses, He does not act arbitrarily, It
also marks His Grace; for it holds out the hope; that
if one goes on doing the right thing, he is sure to attain
summum bonun.



--- Page 118 ---

Now one, who by his words, mind, or hands, inflicts

frustration on the villain, or engages his own being for the

good, serves a noble cause, to the delight of Ahura Mazda.



--- Page 119 ---

Resistance to Ea ee eee ae is as much necessary as promotion of

virtue.

He, who is most beneficent to the pious, be he a Khactu

(Vaishya), a Verejena (Kshatriya) or an Aryamna (Brahmin),

O Ahura, or a servant of the world—verily he belongs to

Rectitude, and serves to uphold Conscience.



--- Page 120 ---

Bhagavan Zarathushtra lays down here another funda-
mental principle of his religion viz that caste distinction
counts for nothing, and that the only thing that really

counts is whether the man is a promoter of Rectitude.

All of us are equally subject to desire, anger, fear, greed,
grief, anxiety, hunger and fatigue. What is the good of

division into different castes ?

Now Mazda, I would edterminate all disloyalty and
hostility against You, and also the disbelief of the Khetu

(Vaishya), the innate arrogance .of the Verejena (Kshatriya),

the intemperance of the Aryamna (Brahmin), and the narro-

est mentality of Servant of the World.



--- Page 121 ---

One should not entertain any false notion about the
nature of God, suchas that He is indifferent to the moral worth
of man, and may be appeased by mere ceremonies, A

true believer in God must always be watchful to find out

the besetting sins of himself and his community, He must

be immaculate,



--- Page 122 ---

This Thine, which is the greatest of all, viz Srusam

( Bhakti ), I solicit, for my protection. Confer long life,
along with the strength of Conscience. The path where

Ahura Mazda abides, is straight thoroughly with Rectitude.



--- Page 123 ---

Some people think that they can deceive Mazda and

get credit for virtue, without being really virtuous. They

failto see that they can deceive mem but cannot deceive
Mazda. Mazda is cleverer than they—for all their wits are
derived from Him. There isno scope for cunning in reli-

gious life. here only sincerety counts

The invoker who is genuine in Rectitude isthe real
harvester of ( the fruits of ) his noble spirit. Therefore send
(such ) a mind, that I may grow thoughtful and active.
So I worship You Ahura Mazda, in order to see You, and

to touch jy bp:



--- Page 124 ---

Invocation of God, to the neglect of rectitude, is

unavailing It does not suffice for the vision of Mazda.

In order to be able to see Mazda, one should be righteous
thoughtful, and active.

2



--- Page 125 ---



--- Page 126 ---

Come unto me, O the Best one ; arrive Mazda, and show

Thyself, along with rectitude and conscience, which are

said to be the highest ( assets ) of a Maghayan ( a member of

the Magha brotherhood). On account of our reverence,

may wonderful graces appear within us.



--- Page 127 ---



--- Page 128 ---

Teach me enterprise, so that I may execute, through

Conscience, Thy imperatives, O Mazda, and sing hymns to

Rectitude. Bestow indeed, the solidity of immortality and

the wealth of spirituality.



--- Page 129 ---

A ey er

Now this thy Manyu (principle ) Mazda, viz holiness,
which is the best of all resources, may Conscience choose,

for the sake of righteous ventures, I would attain perfection
by following the urge of the soul ( call of the Ideal )



--- Page 130 ---

Bhagavan Zarathustra here emphasises the import-
ance of holiness cleanliness ( of heart ) is next to
godliness. When the heart has earned immunity against

passions and has become so pure that no evil impulse arises in

it, the vision of God is very near.



--- Page 131 ---

All permanent gains, Mazda, that were, that are, and
that yet shall be, You have destined on your grace. Shower

om us conscience, non-chalance, rectitude and up-mind.

( higher self)



--- Page 132 ---

Whatever prizes you have won, Mazda taught you their

y

value, and that is why your strove for them.

When there is genuine love of God, all the virtues flow

in speedily.
And You, O Mazda, who is the most beneficent Lord,

do hear me and purify me and confer on me, for any



--- Page 133 ---

reason whatsover (i.e. irrespective of my desert) Faith, and

world promoting Rectitude, and Conscience, and Non-

chalance.



--- Page 134 ---

Lift me up Ahura, and through Faith, give me strength.
Through purest mentality Mazda, give me abundant vigour.
Through rectitude, (give me) firm courage, and through

conscience, expansion.



--- Page 135 ---

Whatever torments you may send to me Ahura, I would
taste them as delights, through Your Nonchalance Mazda,
which is the blessing of conscience. O Noble Faith reveal
Rectitude for the sake of religion.



--- Page 136 ---

“Mind is its own place, and itself can make a heaven
of hell, and a hell of heaven”

Nonchalance can turn hell into heaven, as the Maha-
bharata notes.



--- Page 137 ---

Deign to accept Holy Mazda that which, Zarathustra

dedicates unto you—the Up-mind of his own mind, and the

best of his thoughts, words and deeds, his devotion and
intrepidity.

Complete surrender of one’s own will to the will of

Mazda, is the best way of God-realisation.



--- Page 138 ---

This is the way to maintain

Burn away your own will.

the non-duality of Khoda.



--- Page 139 ---

Those actions, those words, and those sacrifices, which
will bring to them (i.e. to all), © Mazda, Immortality and

Rectitude, as well as Nonchalance and Spirituality—with

plenty of them (such actions etc.) in Thy hands, O Ahura,

quickly come.



--- Page 140 ---

Now offering to You, with his mind, the whole of

the good spirit and the deed of a holyman, he whose soul
accords with Rectitude, comes to Thy worship, Mazda, in

order to praise with chants.



--- Page 141 ---

Some people have the foolish idea that offering of
gifts to Mazda, is like offering of bribes (for getting some
favour)—as if Mazda is in need of anything,—in need of our

presents.

He is above all wants. He does not go about begging

honours from the ignorant. By honouring him, we make

ourselves honourable (worthy)

I do not ask you to bastow giftson me, nay, I ask you

to be worthy of the gifts (that I intend to give to you).



--- Page 142 ---

Now obeisant,O Ahura, I would offer to You and to

Rectitude, the whole world as my oblation,—through non-

chalance, on which Conscience is based. By all (that he

does) O Mazda, the sage accomplishes your worship (all

his work is worship)



--- Page 143 ---

The real devotee gives up the whole world to Mazda,

i. e. he no longer plies the world for his own sake, but only

as the servant of Mazda. He has no objective of his own.

It is foolishness to think that Mazda has anything to gain

by our praises, as Jalal, that interpreter of the principles of

the Gathas tells us.

Tam not sanctified by their glorification (of Me). Itis

they that become sanctified and pearl-scattering (pure and

radiant).

Now we would, in Rectitude, greet your glorious Fire,
O Ahura—holiest, strong, ever delightful and sare benefactor.
Now O Mazda, with those Thy hands, subdue the malicious
villain.



--- Page 144 ---

Fire is the symbol of the self-consuming love for
Mazda. A Cisti isnever so happy as when this fire burns

in him.

My soul is afurnace; it is happy with the fire. It is

enough for the furnace that it is the fire’s house;

Fire (Sacrife in fire) is the symbol of the house-holder’s
life, and Bhagavan Zarathushtra gives preference to the

status of the house—-holder.



--- Page 145 ---

What is thy nonchalance, Thy sacrifice, Thy work,
Mazda, by which I might attain Thee? With the help

of Rectitude and Conscience, I would save Your votaries.

You are supreme over all, and I see You superior to all

angels, men and beasts.



--- Page 146 ---



--- Page 147 ---

O Mazda, if you do really exist, together with Rectitude

and Conscience, then give me the sign of the whole ideal

of this life, so that serving and praising you, I may proceed

towards self-realisxtion.



--- Page 148 ---



--- Page 149 ---

Where is Thy saint Mazda, who established in
Conscience, is, through the wealth of your doctrine, lord of

the cycle of gain and loss? I do not know him, .who is other

than you. (I donot know any one other than you). So
save us, O Holy one.



--- Page 150 ---

Maha Ratu Zarathushtra lays down here the principle
that we should rise above both good and evil—not only
should we resist the temptation of the evil, but subdue the
{ure of the good as well. This is tosay that we should not
allow ourselves to be swayed too much for doing a parti-
cular good act—not to be so much anxious for achieving the
result, as to overlook the worth of the means, or lose peace

of mind for its sake.

It is our duty ‘to follow the right, because it is right, in

scorn of the consequence’ ; at the same time equanimity is

too preciousa wealth to be bartered away for any other

gain.



--- Page 151 ---

He has no thought of pleasure or pain, loss or gain,

victory or defeat.

I am blind to aught other than God. I see Him alone.

Such is the demand of Love. Proclaim it

They in whom there jis exceeding doubt, tremble at
our enterprise, when we, O Mazda, trustful in your
dispensation, challenge dangers. They who do not care for



--- Page 152 ---

Rectitude,—from them, Conscience shrinks away. ( lf

one persistently refuses to act upto the dictates of Cons-

cience, it dies out, reducing the man to the level of a brute ).



--- Page 153 ---

Those who are well-acquainted with Thy noble Faith,

a, and yet disserve by misconduct, as if ignorant of

Conscience, from them Rectitude recedes, as wild beasts do

from us,



--- Page 154 ---

of Conscience. I consider noble Faith to be the benign

root of rectitude. All these, O Mazda, are contingent on
Thy nonchalance.
How isit that those who prescribe the rules of purity

do not themselves practise them ?

Sages have told acceptance (of activity) to be the course



--- Page 155 ---

Now, Spirituality and Immortality ( godfiness ) both flow

from You. By the strength of Conscience, Rectitude also

flows, along with Faith ; as well as solidarity and strength,

With all these, O Mazda, you are available to the wise.



--- Page 156 ---

What are your laws, O Mazda, and what is your design 2
Which is your praise and which your worship? Tell us

Mazda, let us hear, so that it may grant us the good fortune

of your guidance. Teach us the path of Rectitude, which

is the selfhood ( characteristic expression ) of Conscience.



--- Page 157 ---



--- Page 158 ---

About that path, O Ahura, which You told me to be of

Conscience, and which happens to be the religion of all

the prophets, and which, by good deeds, promotes rectitude

as weil, and which brings to the righteous, recompense, of

which you ate the giver.



--- Page 159 ---

The way of all the saints ( seoshyants ) may be said to
be one only. For in essential matters, there is no difference

between one prophet and another.

Inasmuch as the same God is worshipped everywhere,

all of them are different tf s of the same religion.

To my embodied better-mind (Soul), O WN a tlpea ne
thy = c

such boon as leads to the improvement of the living world

, alte i 4 e : - BH, {
through deeds of Conscience. For the duties of Rectitude

give me, O Ahura, your directions ;

I shall carry them out.



--- Page 160 ---

Now, O Mazda, teach me the

best words and the best

deeds. And then belauded, do You send me Conscience

and Rectitude. I wish for your nonce . Grant unto

me the true life of good-will.



--- Page 161 ---

Desire for pleasure should be discarded, but not desire
for the good. Without the desire for, Selfrealisation

or God-realisation, life becomes blank, mere darkness.

Resolution is the only way by which a man’s ideal can

become actual.

Those who smother every resolution, live in an atmos-

phere of dense darkness. his is tantamount to killing the

Everything that thou hast of wealth and handicraft, was

it not at first a quest and a thought 7

Wheth eedily or slowly, he who isa seeker, will he

a finder.

Development of personality is said to be the highest
good, This is to be attained through the satisfaction of all

rational desires,



--- Page 162 ---



--- Page 163 ---

That alone is good for ones own self, which is good for
anybody whosoever (ie. good for all). May sole-Ruler

Ahura ‘Mazda give solidarity and strength, which I ask from

Him. For upholding Rectttude; teach me, O Faith, the

rule, which is the grace of fortune and the course of Cons-

cience.



--- Page 164 ---

Now, besto ss ot holiness ( highest
Do Thou,

O Mazda kindle in us the holiest Manyu ( best propensity ),

so that it may, for the sake of Rectitude, furnish the power

of Conscience, towards a long life of bliss, for all time

to come,



--- Page 165 ---



--- Page 166 ---

May that man attain better than the good, :who teaches

us rhe str t path of Sabas (love }—the path of the

tangible ( gross) and the spiritual (subtle ) self. A true

discipline it is. wherein Ahura lies, (and whereby) O

Mazda, the devout gentleman becomes attuned to you.



--- Page 167 ---



--- Page 168 ---

Therefore | thought you to be the Holy Seed, O Mazda,

since thine are those arms, with which you give protection,
and by which you award benediction, both to the sinner and
to the virtuous. Your glowing fire is vivid with Rectirude.

It serves to lend strength my Conscience.



--- Page 169 ---



--- Page 170 ---

I recognised you to be holy, Ahura Mazda, as scon as I

found you to be the foremost, at the creation of life, and as

you award requiteful deeds, as well as (what are) requiteful
words, viz..

lf to the ill, and good excellence to the good,

by Thy laws, at the next turn of life.



--- Page 171 ---



--- Page 172 ---



--- Page 173 ---



--- Page 174 ---

There is, no doubt, Evil in the world, but there is also

Spenta Manyu, which can conquer it with the help of

O Mazda, at the moment Your Spenta Manyu ( Sattwa conscience and nonchalance.

Guna) comes to any body, at that very moment, nonchalance

As soon as a man resorts to Spenta Manyu, he puts

and Conscience ( also come). To bim, by whose deeds the himself on the right track to prosperity, both material and

region of Rectitude expands, the cep enjoins Faith, iri
g ectitude expands, the Preceptor enjoins Faith, spiritual.

and him, no one can deflect from Your duty.



--- Page 175 ---

I realised You to be noble, O Mazda, when conscience

came to me, and asked me ““Who are you? Whose are you?
Task you, at what time you would understand the purpose

of your body and mind ?”



--- Page 176 ---



--- Page 177 ---



--- Page 178 ---

Then I told him the first “I am Zarathushtra, who

real opponent of him who wilfully sins, and a
a .

would bea See
resolute gratifier ( supporter ) of the pious. This is ws

i e azda
esire prestige, and think of strength, whenever, Mazda,
Coue BS)

I praise and pray to You.

Resistance to evil is as much important to moral life as

promotion of virtue.
It is such militancy that earned for Prophet ( avatara )
Parshu Rama the epithet that he was “a Brahmana of Ksha-

triya type’. It is rot unlikely that the Puranas describe



--- Page 179 ---

Then I recognised You to be holy, O Mazda when Con-

science came tome. I asked her “whom would you teach
¥

me?” Thus 1 would render salutation to Your fire, so long
as I wish and long for Rectitude.



--- Page 180 ---

Conscience leads tus to God. If Conscience does not

generate the belief in Mazda ( as the source of Conscience )

it does not do all that it should.

Duty, without faith in God, is insufficient



--- Page 181 ---

Then give me Rectitude which I invoke. Through

faith, I would attain perfection. Test us, by what are your

tests in this (respect ). 'Whatever your tests are, thty are

t
¥

for (finding out ) the strong. For powerful as You are,

You grant the wishes ( only ) of the strong.



--- Page 182 ---

An aspirant has to acquire the strength to pass through
all trials,

A wealking cannot reach the goal,
Then I recognized You to be noble Mazda, when Con-

A strong man is never afraid of tests.
science appeared to me, and I was illumined by your words

Inflict any trouble on me, I am the heart-giver (dedicated)
amongst men. I would accomplish whatever you tell me
to be the best.

The greater the difficulty, the greater is the gain, when
one overcomes it.



--- Page 183 ---

A staunch devotee welcomes troubles, as it makes his

spirit stronger.

He enjoys dangers. How would he be sorrowful.

A lover forgets himself. He has no awareness of his

No good talking glibly ; flare up and go on burning.



--- Page 184 ---

When you told me “pursue Rectitude through equity”

you told me something unheard-of before. I would stand

up, notwithstanding whatever may happen to me. Devoted
and upright, I would proceed with great vigour, so that

Your blessings may put the votary in joy.



--- Page 185 ---

One who sees others in himself, and himself in others,

does not stray from Rectitude.

I realised you to be holy, Ahura Mazda, when Consci-

nee camé tome. For the attainment of wealth and joy,

give me that long life which none but you hold, ( and also)

lasting prizes which you destined in your nonchalance.



--- Page 186 ---



--- Page 187 ---

Just as an affectionate man gives a present to a friend,

similarly Mazda, send me your equity. What your non-

chalance is, that atises from Rectitude. I would’ stand up
for strengthening the creed, along with those who recite

your mantras.



--- Page 188 ---



--- Page 189 ---



--- Page 190 ---



--- Page 191 ---



--- Page 192 ---

I realised You to be e. Mazda Ahura, when Cons-

cience came to me and presented blessed contentment, the
,

best mentality. A virile man should not be panderous to

4

the vicious, May Thy virtuous followers smash all devil-dom.



--- Page 193 ---

How long will you goon saying “I would possess the

whole world, alone for myself” ?

It is enough if we have got wine. It is impudence to

eo

sist on music as well,



--- Page 194 ---

Now O Ahura, Zarathushtra chooses that Manyu which

isthe best of thine all. May Rectitude incarnate (materia-

lise ) and the up-mind be vivacious. May faith serve for

( procuring ) nonchalance, which reveal, the Self. May

}

Conscience, through deeds, award plentitude.



--- Page 195 ---



--- Page 196 ---

worship, I ‘would worship one like you. O Mazda teach,
one-like-me, who is your friend. May dear Rectitude bestow

perfection, so that conscience may appear to me.

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura ; how proceeding to



--- Page 197 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura : what is the acme

of best life. How can I achieve this O Mazda, that such



--- Page 198 ---

(state of things) may invert—(a state where in) holy

Rectitude is distasteful to all, while the malign Manyu

( Tamo Guna ) is cordial and dear.



--- Page 199 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura : which person is
the first creator and up-holder of Rectitude, which one
is He, who chalked out the path of the Sun and the Stars ?

Who is it that makes the moon wax and wane? I wish to

know all this and more as well.



--- Page 200 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura which person up-

holds the earth and also the heaven from falling down ?
Who ( upholds ) water and plants? Who yokes quickness
to the storm and lightning? Which person is the inspirer
of Conscience ?



--- Page 201 ---

Mazda supports the firmament and gives swiftness to

the storm.

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura : which artist made
light and darkness, and which artist made sleep and waking 2
Who ishe that made the dawn, the noon and the dusk,
i
| which recall the sagacious to their business ( prayer ).
|



--- Page 202 ---



--- Page 203 ---



--- Page 204 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura : whether what

I say is correct, viz., Faith embellishes Rectitude by deeds

and to them, You send nonchalance, through Conscience,
’ ; £

for whom you made the world full of struggle (for existence).



--- Page 205 ---



--- Page 206 ---

That I ask You, tell me aright Ahura ; who has fashioned

noble Faith, together with nonchalance ? Who, in

i + alike to the father? Mazda, I
wisdom, make e son alike to the father

‘ 2 ; about these— who are the
proach You on questions about these—You

Protector of the Universe, through Spenta Manyu

Mazda makes the son alike to the tather: in other
words there is reign of Law in the Universe. The Uni-
verse is a Cosmos, and not a Chaos. But this does not
assail the fact that man is free. By mastering the Laws
of Nature in the outer world, he can rule over Nature,
and by resorting to nonchalance in the inner world he can

always keep himself free,



--- Page 207 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura: I would meditate

on all that are your Commandments, so that I may, through

Conscience, understand the precepts, and also that through
Rectitude, I might attain the Perfection of life, and thereby

my soul may arrive at self balance.



--- Page 208 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura ; how can I achieve



--- Page 209 ---

the benefic religion, which savants teach, for thegrowth of

Nonchalance. Through this superb Nonchalance Mazda,

the saint becomes similar-to-you,—dweiling in the same

abode with Rectitude and Conscience.



--- Page 210 ---

This I ask You; tell me atight Ahura: tell mea

Religion which is the best of all and which would !

on me simultaneously both rectitude and prosperity and

which through the words of Faith, would stick to right deeds.

For my edification, O Mazda, I wish (to know) your will.



--- Page 211 ---

The best religion is that which teaches pursuit of

rectitude within the world and not by
world.

renouncing the



--- Page 212 ---



--- Page 213 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura: how Faith would

£

reach them, to whom Your Religion appeals. I know You to

be the foremost of all —all others I denounce with my

heart.



--- Page 214 ---



--- Page 215 ---

This T ask you, tell me aright Ahura : who is virtuous,—
or what I ask; who is vicious? Or which one is the villain ?
©r is he the villain, the vicious one, who deflects me from
your love? How is he, if he does not consider himself to
be in the wrong ( when his narrow Conscience misguides

him ) ?

In secular law, only the external act counts. In moral

law motive isthe only factor for determining whether the

o

action is right or wrong.



--- Page 216 ---



--- Page 217 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura: How would I
abolish the evil to the finis, away from us. Save them who
are full of heresies. Neither do they delight in following
( the path of ) Rectitude, nor do they enjoy the Conscience,

by communion with it.

Nothing else than the love of Mazda is competeni to

eradicate evil impulses completely and redeem the sinner,

And such immaculacy is what the Holy Prophet desires

It is very necessary to make the heart immaculate. For

what we lack is only the power of Pharaoh but not his

temperament,



--- Page 218 ---

This I as You, tell me aright Ahura: how would I

deliver the devil unto the hands of Rectitude. T would

extirpate the evil with the strength of your Gospel. Give

me strong nerve against the villains. Thus I would destroy

his snare and assault.



--- Page 219 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura ; if by Rectitude,

You prevail over all herein (in the universe ); whem the

two brawling fighters meet together, with all those rites

Mazda, which you confirm, whither do You go? To whem

do you grant victory ?



--- Page 220 ---

[t is preposterous to think that Mazda's help would go



--- Page 221 ---

to the vicious and not to the vrituous.

upholder of the moral order of the universe.

For Mazda is the

This I ask you, tell me aright Ahura: who is the slayer
of Viritra,—tell me about all that there are. Sendfor me a
splendid wise and selfknowing preceptor. May Devotion,
through Conscience, come to him—to him Mazda to

whomsoever you wish,



--- Page 222 ---

Love of Mazda is also the gift of Mazda. It is only

the fortunate few that are attracted to Him. Most of us
are indifferent to Him—the existence of Mazda does not
make any difference in the course of our life. To feel an
irrepressible desire to see Mazda is a rare fortune —a gift

<.

from Mazda



--- Page 223 ---



--- Page 224 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright Ahura: how will I whirl
about along with you, Mazda? Grant your ecstacy so that
it may be mine, | would have command over Spirituality

and Immortality, through that Mantra which we practise

( recite ) with Rectitude.



--- Page 225 ---



--- Page 226 ---

come to me, ( only ) when I give up ( the desire for )

10m,



--- Page 227 ---



--- Page 228 ---

This I ask You, tell me aright, Ahura: he who does not

give such meed to the deserving and the man who gives it

to truthful ourselves—what the consequence for it, befa
the former, and I would also know, what happens to the

latter.



--- Page 229 ---

O Mazda, how can the wicked (be said to) be the
possessors of moral courage. This I ask You; what (to
speak ) of them who tyrannise ? That by which the Karpas

and the Usikhs throw the world ina rage, and by which

the Kavas grow in obduracy,—such (actions), Rectitude does

not esteem as benificence.



--- Page 230 ---

The religion that does not purify character, hardly

deserves to be called religion.

The oil that extinguishes the lamp, is not oil, it is

water,



--- Page 231 ---

I would now speak out. Lend your ears and hear all

those who have come from near and those who have come

from far. Ponder over this the most momentous thing.

Let not the false prophet kill your soul asecond time. In
this manner (by listening to my advice) screen off the

tongue of the Evil one.



--- Page 232 ---



--- Page 233 ---

| would now speak ofthe two primordial Manyus

(Gunas, Forces) of life, of whom the nobler one told (him)

that is dark : “neither our minds, nor our doctrines, neither
duties, nor manners, neither words nor deeds, neither

thoughts nor souls, do agree.”

MahaRatu Zarathushtra states that the universe is the
result of the action and interaction of two contrary forces,

This is why there is so much conflict in the world.



--- Page 234 ---

I would now speak about the fundamentals of this life

which the wise Ahura Mazda told me. They who do not

a

practise the doctrines, as I conceive and state, to them “alas”

would be ( the words ) at the end of life.



--- Page 235 ---

the highest (truths) of this

stablished it on ( the basis of )
the father 32 d
a its daughter ( effect ).

does heyer ae



--- Page 236 ---

Mazda has nothing to gain by deceiving any body; one

should put full trust in Him,

Mazda has no greed for wealth. All wealth is His
creation. Why should He deceive ?



--- Page 237 ---

IT would now speak out what the Holiest One told me—

words that are the best for the mortals to hear. Those who

offer to this-me ( me as 1am ) his homage and choice, would

attain spirituality and immortality, by the deeds of Con-

science, O Ahura Mazda.

God speaks through His Prophets. Submission to the

Prophet leads to spirituality and immortality:



--- Page 238 ---

I would now, greeting Rectitude, proclaim the most
important of all, viz., the good institutions that there are.

May Ahura Mazda of benevolent spirit, hear, and teach me

well, the duties of him, who quests Brahma (the Absolute)

through Conscience.



--- Page 239 ---

( You are He ) Whose Love the: saints solicit,

who are, who were, and who yet shall be—and that the sou

men who are

injurious and impious, ( ) regeneration, therein ak

, O Ahura

»wer of ( You ) Mazda, is



--- Page 240 ---

Saints are self-satisfied. They have noother objective
in life to pursue. Thus their only concern is to sing the

glory of the Lord. As the Bhagavata says.

Greeting with hymns I would welcome Him, and yes

IT would behold Hix: with my eyes, Him, Ahura Mazda,

whom Rectitude attains through words and deeds of cons-
cience. Then in the House of Song we would entertain

Him, the Brahma.



--- Page 241 ---



--- Page 242 ---



--- Page 243 ---

Him I would now propitiate by Conscience, (Him) who
has granted to our will (the choice of) the right and the

wrong ( ie., the Freedom of the will ). May Ahura Mazda

bestow on us commendable nonchalance. May our cattle

and men increase. May Rectitude generate Conscience.



--- Page 244 ---



--- Page 245 ---

Let us extol Him by rites of Faith—Him who is called

as Abura Mazda by name. For He has inspired Rectitude



--- Page 246 ---



--- Page 247 ---



--- Page 248 ---



--- Page 249 ---

They, Deva-worshippers and other men, who denied Him

and who still deny Him—other than us, who acknowledge

Him,—O Ahura Mazda, Redeemer, Lord of Wisdom, and
Holy spirit, You are the friend, the brother and the father

{ even of them ).



--- Page 250 ---



--- Page 251 ---



--- Page 252 ---

To which land would I turn, and turning, whither would
I arrive, carrying around me the Khaetus ( Vaishyas ) and

the Aryamnas ( Brahmins)? The Verejenas (Kshatriyas)

that there are, do not at all please me, nor do they, who

are the impious preceptors of the land. Mazda Ahura,

how could I satisfy you ?



--- Page 253 ---

This I know that I am helpless, in as much as I am

(owner) of few men and few cattle. I cry to You, Lord, look

upon. me forthwith. Inflame that rapture in me which a friend

induces ina friend. Tell me of Rectitude, which is the aim
of Conscience.



--- Page 254 ---



--- Page 255 ---



--- Page 256 ---

When O Mazda, would th: who are
hearts, take up for the consolidation of life and for Rectitude,

the duties of the Shayoshynts ( Yogis ), in words and deeds ?

To whom does Conscience come for their protection? O

Ahura, for me, | choose You as the preceptor.



--- Page 257 ---

Now those villains who defile the directions of Rec-

titude, to the devastation of the world, the village and the

country ; being evil-doer, such one is, by his own deeds,
a soul-forfeit (out-law), and any one, who strips such yillain
of his strength and vitality, puts him in the well-known
path of nobility (on the right track of virtue),



--- Page 258 ---

Nonviolence is ‘the whole’ of equity. But benevolent

violence is equally just. ‘Iam a man of pri

T say, is the principle that I follow:



--- Page 259 ---

The good capable man, who kills one proceeding for the
laceration of a relative or a friend, the pious man liying by
law, (if he kills) the scoundrel—any one, being judicious

would call that ( action ) to be manly. Ahura Mazda, save

him from ( the sins of ) this violence.



--- Page 260 ---



--- Page 261 ---

Whereas the man who does not come to help him, will

surely go the abode oflie. He certainly is vicious, who is

most good to the vicious, and he is pious, to whom a pious

one is dear, This you ordained as the primary Law, O

Ahura.

to prevent a crime that is being

; a share of the crime.

May your wrath burn as straw—both him who commits

a crime and him who permits it to be committed.



--- Page 262 ---

Which’ person ‘will give me protection Mazda, when

sinful villains oppress me, except yourself and your fire and

conscience, by the deeds of which two ( fire and conscience )

You established rectiude ? _ Explain this rule to me for my

religion.



--- Page 263 ---

To whom else should [ turn? It is you who generate

the inclination to pray and then grant the prayer.

Fire is symbolical of the all consuming love of God and

those who call the Parsis Fire-worshippers, pay a conpliment



--- Page 264 ---

Whatever may be the plot that the sinner makes against

me, let not its flame burn me by its action. Let it revert

to him and afflict the sinner. May it seclude ( what ) the

soul of the pious ( is ), but never O Mazda, on any account,

that ( the soul ) of the impious antagonist.



--- Page 265 ---

lordly and righteous. What your Rectitude is—the

Rectitude about which the maker of the world spoke—I

wish ( to know ) that from you, through conscience.

I might adore you, the most vene



--- Page 266 ---

The example of a saint inspires
the monitions of hundred others: The life

teaches a man that the ideal of God-realisati

empty talk or mere surmise

5



--- Page 267 ---

Man or woman, O Ahura Mazda, who for my sake,
sticks to what you told to be the best (asset) of 'ife vic.
virtue for the sake of virtue and non-chalance through

conscience, and those whom I associate in your worship,—

with all of them, | would cross the Chinvat bridge.



--- Page 268 ---

to conscience. rectitude and mnonchalance. ‘Duty for
Duty’s sake’ is enunciated here for the first time.
}

There isno discrimination against any body. Every one

—man or woman—can cross the Chinvat bridge if he sticks



--- Page 269 ---

May the Karpas and the Kavis imbibe nonchalancen. By

their evil deeds, they kill the soul of man;—( those people )

at whom their own souls and own ideas rage, when they

arrive where the Chinvat bridge is ; they are the inmates

of the House of Lie ( this deceptive world ) for all time.



--- Page 270 ---

The sinner wrongs himself the most—he will curse

himself on the Day of Judgement. One who is established

in nonchalance has no reason to sin and no occassion

for repentence.



--- Page 271 ---

As coon as Rectitude grows in the riteless sons and grand-

sons of Frayana, the Turanian, so soon do their realms develop
by the power of Faith and forthwith Conscience accosts
them and Ahura Mazda (Himself) teaches them to their

delight.



--- Page 272 ---

Mazda is not the God of any particular tribe. The
doors of Mazda-Yasna are not cl sed to the foreigners for
ever. So soon as any © of them becomes fit, |
Frayana ) to be incluc ed in the fold

Non-proselytisation is « eniai of the brotherhood of man.
He who discourages the idea, sets too much importance ‘on
the supposed superiority of his race.

There isno doubt that Atharvan Zarathushtra desired

his Gospel to be spread throughout the whole world. Non-

proselytisation means rejection of his precept.



--- Page 273 ---



--- Page 274 ---

Whoso, out of his respect for Spitama Zarathushtra,

(that man) is worthy of high

rejoices in whole mankind,
May Ahura Mazda grant him long life. May
Rectitude regards him as a

esteem.

Conscience develop his realms.

good friend.

Maha Ratu Zarathushtra enjoins love for the whole of

manki e c
nkind. One who does not love man, does not really love
God. j



--- Page 275 ---



--- Page 276 ---

O Zarathushtra, which virtuous man is friend to You,
and who wishes high honour for this great Magha (Church) @
Yes, he is Kava Vistaspa, the Hero, Whom, O Ahura Mazda,

you wish to be in Your own abode ( presence ), hurry them

on through the voice of Conscience.



--- Page 277 ---



--- Page 278 ---

O Scions of the great Spitama clan, sons of Haechataspa,

I would teach you [those things which are the best for you

to hear] Since you discriminate the Right and the Wrong,

on account those your deeds, you have been granted Rec-

titude which really is verily the best gift of Ahura.



--- Page 279 ---

Discrimination between Right and Wrong is the essence
of Rectitude and Rectitude is the best gift of Mazda.

© Hugva Frashoshtra, come up here alongs with those
devotees, for whom both of us, desire eternal good—where
Rectitude accompanies Faith, where Nonchalance is the wish

of Conscience, and where in Ahura Maza lies the utmost.



--- Page 280 ---

It is in the company of congenial friends, that devotion

flourishes,



--- Page 281 ---

Whereas | tell you the practical and not the unpractical,

O Adhi-Jamaspa of the Hugava-Clan, ever know (experience)
Brahma, by recollecting with reverence. One who dis-
criminates between eternal and the ephemeral, is the

accurate cogniser of rectitude, O Ahura Mazda.



--- Page 282 ---



--- Page 283 ---

Whoso deals well to me, to hima better than that, for

my welfare, [ impel through Conscience ; (but) torments
to him who puts us to torments. O Mazda, through Rec-
titude I would serve your will, This (fulflment of Your

desire) is “the ought’’ (propriety) of my Conscience and
Duty



--- Page 284 ---

Retribution may be said to be social justice—though the

mind should always be kept free from malice,

— : 6



--- Page 285 ---

He who, for my sake, sincerely serves with Rectitude
that, which to Zarathushtra is his dearest mission, to him

will be granted as reward, the Higher Self, together with

the whole world—beautiful and lively. Consign all this

for my sake, Mazda ; Thou art the most provident.



--- Page 286 ---

One may attain the highest end of life by serving the

will of the prophet, for the will of God is reflected in the

will of the Prophet.



--- Page 287 ---



--- Page 288 ---

May Ahurn Mazda grant us, through Spenta Manyu all
the six holy institutes, viz. 1. Vahista Mana (best ie.
broadest Conscience) 2. Along with Asa (rectitude) in

deeds and words 3. Haurvatat (spirituality) 4. Ameretatat

(godliness) 5. Kshathra (nonchalance) and 6. Armaiti (faith)



--- Page 289 ---



--- Page 290 ---

May the highest (mode) of the best Spenta Manyu
(Sattwa Guna ) so operate viz. by the tongue, through the



--- Page 291 ---

Mazda is the upholder of Rectitude. The more virtuous

aman is, the nearer he comes to Mazda, the source of

perpetual delight.

Thou art allthe good, that there is in this Manyu

{ cosmic force ). Thou, hast fashioned for us this world of



--- Page 292 ---



--- Page 293 ---



--- Page 294 ---



--- Page 295 ---

From this Spenta Manyu (Sattwa Guna-benign force) O

Mazda, the impious would run away, but not the pious.

Even aman of small means, happens (shifts) for the sustenance
of the pious, while being ford of much, the villain goes

on misdealing (misappropriating).

The virtuous person does not shirk works of Spenta
Manyu; even if he is poor. The vicious, even if he is well
off, cannot give up greed. The pious man is always true

to his own self, whatever may be his circumstances,



--- Page 296 ---

discretion, the impious one would taste his desert swagge-

ring in his deeds ( accruing ) out of evil mind.

© Ahura Mazda, to the pious, direct that Spenta Manya
{ Sattwa Guna) which is the best of all (gifts). At your



--- Page 297 ---

So give, through Spenta Manyu (Benign Force) O

Ahura Mazda, to the votary striving for welfare, the Light

of Faith and divine Rectitude, That (light) verily, would

convert many seekers,



--- Page 298 ---

Mazda is here solicited for help. But what is the use
of asking succour from Him, if He is also the creator of

Angra Manyu ?

This is another knotty question. If Mazda is good, He

should not have created Angra Manyu. If He created

ve
Mazda may not be said to be good.

Angra Manyu,



--- Page 299 ---



--- Page 300 ---



--- Page 301 ---

’ 7 ‘ . +
Those deeds by which Rectitude Overcomes vi

ce,—the
deeds that are held to be honourable and divine ; and
which confer Ameretati ( godliness) to men and angels,—
on account of those practices, may Ahura award to us
( knowledge of ) Brahma ( the Absolute )



--- Page 302 ---



--- Page 303 ---



--- Page 304 ---



--- Page 305 ---

Tell me. since thou knowest, Ahura, what is my future,
and what the fulfilment ( perfection ) that would come to

me. When Mazda, will the virtous subvert the vicious ?

This is said to be the happy consummation of life.



--- Page 306 ---

In the final shape of things Rectitude is sure to prevail ;

otherwise the cosmos ceases to be acosmos and degene-

rates into a chaos. E
¥ I would now realise the best of all lessons, that which

vo A
the prov ident Ahura, holy and Wise, teaches for Rectitude
~ 3

Orie may reasonably hope that Mazda Yasna would
and which is secret philosophy ; viz that “by the deeds of

flourish again.
Conscience, O Mazda, one becomes similar to you,”



--- Page 307 ---

One who holds (applies) his mind to the greater as
well as to the smaller, (i.e. to everything ), he upholds
religion in deeds and words. His pleasure, wish and choice

?

To achieve at-one-ment with Mazda, is the lesson that i :
; ’ all accord together. :
the Gatha teaches, rectitude makes that possible. gether. In Your duty, diverse are the methods.

Until you become that thing, you do not know it com-

pletely—know what it is.



--- Page 308 ---

There are many ways of serving Mazda. It is not
limited to any particular method. “In my Father's house,
thse are many mansions.” When the pleasure of Mazda is
the only object of all his activities, any act done by the

devotee is as good as any other act. Mazda gives them

equal values. Whatever such devotee does, is the service

of Mazda.



--- Page 309 ---

May our moral courage increase, and may not immoral
courage (cynicism ) increase, by the deeds of good Cisti

( Theosophy ), O faith, conjoin to men, the life that is the

best, Let the world grow. Develop her for our lustre
( prosperity ).



--- Page 310 ---



--- Page 311 ---

May it (moral courage) afford us good shelter, and may it
afford us solidarity too ; and strength for the development
of conscience. And may Ahura Mazda then furnish to
such one (us), the sprout of rectitute, forthe evolution
of the highest life.



--- Page 312 ---

Whatever else may be the other objects of religion,

there is no doubt that shelter, security, and strength i.e, the

welfare of the society, is alsoits object. This may not be

neglected.



--- Page 313 ---

If we (are about to) injure, restrain us; If we ( are

about to) assail, prevent us. He, who improvised rectitude

in order to implement conscience, by Whose inspiration a man

becomes holy, in such-You, O Ahura, we take shelter.



--- Page 314 ---

Every pull that draws one upwards, is a pull from
Mazda.

The best course is to act upto that call.

Sometimes an evil thought suddenly crosses the mind ;
so vile it is, that one would fain hide it from oneself not
to speak of hiding it from others, It is only the grace of
Mazda that can rescue him from such wretchedness and

make him immune to evil thoughts.

Whither isthe power of Thy good Kshathra (non-
chalance ) Mazda and whither, for me, O Ahura, the glory of

‘Thy Ashi (perseverance)? Whither is the lustre of Thy

Asha (Rectitude) ? I wish them plentifully, O Thou, the
weigher (judge) of the deeds of good Manyu (propensity),



--- Page 315 ---

When you are in need of moral succour, pray to Mazda.

He alone can give help.



--- Page 316 ---

When would I find, O Mazda, that You dwell in every

body, so that there would be, for me, truly the end of all

duality. Tell me aright—aright, the root of Conscience,
so that the Sayoshyant (Prophet) may know where his wel-

fare lies.



--- Page 317 ---



--- Page 318 ---



--- Page 319 ---



--- Page 320 ---

When Mazda, would the Man-of-Man (Superman—

Ideal Man) enterinto me? When would I (be able to)
fling the idol away from this Magha (Church) 7——the idol,
that the Angirasa Karpans set up, and which is the creed
of the undisciplined savages.



--- Page 321 ---



--- Page 322 ---



--- Page 323 ---

When Mazda, would rectitude come along with faith ?

( and ) nonchalance ( which is ) shelter-ful and protective ?

Who will give the quietus to the cruel sinners ? To whom



--- Page 324 ---

Mazda-Yasna supports house-holders life and militancy.

Mazda Yasna advocates the spirit of militancy —readiness

to take up arms in defence.



--- Page 325 ---

Now, they are the Sayoshyants, ( Prophets) in all

countries, who attain beatitude through Conscience—by



--- Page 326 ---

The purity of the saint is contagious. It infuses purity

into others.

Mazda sits inthe heart of the saints (Seshyants) and

sanctities all those who come in contact with them.



--- Page 327 ---



--- Page 328 ---

Now. this arrogant Bendwa who revels in misconduct,
obstructs me too much, Holy Mazda, for my welfare, come
down forthwith and gladden me. May I effect, through

conscience, his discomfiture.

The world is full of rogues and one must have infinite

patience to bear with them.

The ruffians remind us that we should expect kindness

from none except Mazda.



--- Page 329 ---

Now, the creed of this vicious Bendwa impedes me.

A pretender (that he is) he strays away from rectitude.

Neither does he, for himself, hold holy steady faith, nor does

he ever commune with conscience.



--- Page 330 ---

Now, put (me) in this noble creed Mazda, so that I

may invigorate rectitude, and banish impiety. Therefore

I strive (to be) at the crest of conscience and

denounce with heart, all intercourse with the vicious.



--- Page 331 ---



--- Page 332 ---

Those who, out of evilspirit, aggravate by their tongue,
anger and assault, not seeing even though appearing to see,

and whose evil deeds are not at a!l covered ( counter-acted )

by their good deeds,—know them to be diabolical, for such

is the character of the devil.



--- Page 333 ---

ey see yet they see not ; they would like to get rid

f their arrogance, yet they cannot.

ble as well as honourable,
who practises r sonscience. A man of
; Faith alone, is a righteous gentleman. Ahura, all these
Unless I were possessed by the Devil how could I be % ; Se Bente ,
are entirely contingent on your nonchalance.

thinking that I alone exist. ( others exist for me )



--- Page 334 ---

I do beseech You, Mazda ; may you please tell me about
Nonchalance is the very basis of moral life. Without rectitude, as to which mentality is ( suitable ) for Thy duty.

nonchalance conscience and faith are unavailing, Let me comprehend correctly, so that I may preach that

Religion which is yours, O Ahura.

Detachment is the highest good. So long as the mind
hankers for worldly goods, love of God does not find a

place there.



--- Page 335 ---



--- Page 336 ---

© Mazda, let Conscience hear this, and let Rectitude hear,
and Thou too, O Ahura, do Thou listen. What ( good ) is

an Aryamna ( Brahmin) and what a Khactu ( Vaisya )7

He is the real patron, who pays to the Verejena ( Kshatriya )

ample tribute.



--- Page 337 ---



--- Page 338 ---

Give to Frashoshtra, the noblest command (hold) over

rectitude, this I entreat you Ahura Mazda, and to me too,
so that (grounded) in your Nonchalance, we may continue

to be dearest for all time.



--- Page 339 ---

Nonchalance is essential for the acquisition of Rectitude
and through Rectitude, the Prophet, (along with Frashoshtra)

desires to be dearest to Mazda.

Hear the rules framed for the practice of ‘this cult.



--- Page 340 ---

The truthful should never yicld to the liar. Religion serves

to procure the highest reward. So Yamaspa the great has

become established in Rectitude,



--- Page 341 ---

Therefore © Mazda, I entrust all these te you; for

preservation, viz,,(1) Conscience (2) the soul of the pious
(3) Faith which is respectable and honourable, and (4)

grand Nonchalance, unfailing in protection



--- Page 342 ---

But these villains, malevolent, miscreant, evil-tongued,
evil-natured, and evil-minded, on account of their evii

impulses, bring back their souls (instead of keeping them

with Mazda), They are the meet residents of the House

of Lie (this illusory world),



--- Page 343 ---

[tis only when all bad tendencies (the effect of previous
evil thoughts) die out, that one can live in the vicinity
ef Mazda. Otherwise his evil propensities drag his soul

back to the passit of this ephemeral world,

The foolish hedonist does not know how to take refuge

in Mazda. He does not see beyond this werld, and cannot
get away from it, to the eternal life.
Until the H : f aed itself in him

(has become his normal character) a man is his own enemy.

Until the pebble has turned into a ruby, there is self-

conflict—for yet there are two selves within it.



--- Page 344 ---

When would your Rectitude speed security to Zara-
thushtra 7 And when would your Conscience (speed
security) ? By those hymns, Ahura Mazda, in which You

rejoice, | would entreat for that, which is your best favour.

To win the prizes of Mazda, to achieve all that He is

ready to give, should be the aim of our life.



--- Page 345 ---



--- Page 346 ---

When would my soul prevail? By whose support‘

Who would look after me? Who happens to be my saviour

—other than Rectitude and Yourself, Mazda Ahura, and

also except the best ( i.e., social ) Conscience.

Mazda is the only Saviour. He redeems man by  recti-

tude and conscience, lifts him up from mere animal existence.

Man should realise his impotence (helplessness). e

has no control even over his own body, net to speak of

You cannot prevent your hair turning grey, how can
you think of controlling the course of the events of the

world.



--- Page 347 ---

How would he ply the conflict-ridden world, O Mazda.

who, for himself desires it to be ever peaceful 7 Instructing

me clearly in various noble sun-bright (glorious) modes of

worship, teach me the true law (of religion).



--- Page 348 ---

of perseverance, reclaims the near-most region, which the

villains is
Mazda can teach the best way of waging the struggle sh Ue yess: eeaceomaeh Ghee eat ora cat Wane naive tom ae

existence, ic., how to keep the soul unaffected by the out-

ward circumstances,

[ will now tell you what is your duty.

One should start improvement of the world by taking

Mazd her, this up the problems near-most at hand. Telescopic philan-
2 Rectitude betakes him, O Mazda, whom this
Pees ae thropy does not count for much.

nonchalance and conscience guide—the man who by dint



--- Page 349 ---

And now chanting, I would worship you, Mazda Ahura

along with Rectitude; Best ( ie. universal ) Concience, and

Nonchalance. For I wish to continue standing in the path

of the House of Song ( Heaven ), solicitant of fight.



--- Page 350 ---

Come Thou, Holy Mazda Ahura, if you are pleased
with the Prophet, Appear, with very firm protection—

with those hand which would put us to holiness.

Constant prayer and song are the easiest way of reaching

Mazda,

Do not be silent. Your affairs thrive through prayer.



--- Page 351 ---

It is true that Mazda is incomprehensible but it is ‘also
equally true that the saint gets a glimpse of Him. The

Prophet neither deceives othersnor is he self-deluded.

| am not contained in heaven or earth, yet lam con-

tained in the heart of the devotee.

Now this prophet, O Mazda, who arrays words—

loyal, holy, respectful Zarathushtra,-O Ordainer of duty,



--- Page 352 ---



--- Page 353 ---

I would now unite my heart most firmly with you.

I would enter into union with you, (who are) Brahma.

© Mazda, let Rectitude flourish ough Conscience.

Whereever you may lead us, that shall be for our we



--- Page 354 ---



--- Page 355 ---

With verses that are famous in litany, I would walk

saluting Your

r) of Your

around you, Mazda, with out-stretched ha
honourable rectitude, as well asthe srort (p

Conscience.



--- Page 356 ---

ling with those adorations, 1 would approach you,

Mazda, through rectitude and deeds of conscience. As long

asI have hold over my perseverance, I would be Thy

applauder desiring insight.



--- Page 357 ---



--- Page 358 ---

Whatever I may happen to do, and what I may perform
by my deeds, and what by perception I discern to be

worthy—Light, Sun, Day, Dawn, and Stars—all of them

are for (bespeak) Thy superb glory, Ahura Mazda.



--- Page 359 ---



--- Page 360 ---

Now 1 would turn your applauder; Mazda, and remain

so, in piety as long as I may and can, May the giver of life,

fulfil through Conscience, that wish of the right-doer, which

is most worthy.



--- Page 361 ---

When ¢ has attained the highest object of life (the

vision of Mazda) he has nd need to ask for anything else.

Then singing the glory of Mazda becomes his sole occupation.



--- Page 362 ---

Good nonchalance, a desirable fortune, the mcst desirable
one, persistent attempt alone establishes in the heart, for
( the attainment of ) rectitude. By our deeds Mazda, let us
achieve this the best (fortune).

Nonchalance is the greatest lesson of life. It is the

“surest way to permanent peace.



--- Page 363 ---

Aht da, tha hi 3) i to you, which

ith, to you as well

alance for my strength. Grant



--- Page 364 ---

Let them hear with their ears, they who proceed by
actions (Karma Yoga). O Ahura, announce rectitude through

the words (voice) of Conscience, of which (words), Mazda,

Thou art the first exponent.



--- Page 365 ---

Where is the bloom of harmony? Where may pardon
reign supreme? Where does rectitude become glorious ?
And where holy Faith? Where is the best (ive. universal)

Conscience? Where is Your nonchalance, Mazda? [ Tell

me where your nonchalance is, others will be there ]



--- Page 366 ---



--- Page 367 ---

All this I ask, how would one behave in the world—

the worker, proficient in action dutiful and respectful : one

who, able and ardent, approaches a virtuous preceptor, for

tules ( of conduct ).



--- Page 368 ---

The best rule that the preceptor can teach is relinquish- Whoso accomplishes better than the good, and one who
ment of desires. ‘strives for His boons, to him Ahura Mazda, (grants )
nonchalance at the next term of life, but worse than bad

to him, who does not do this,



--- Page 369 ---

O Mazda, of holie

st spirit, Who created the earth and
plants, do give me )

ae godliness and spirituality and strength
and solidity and conscience, This | pr ‘

ay.

Mazda grants rewards to His faithful devotees. Their

recompense comes in the next life, if mot in this.
Nonchalance is the best gift of Mazda.



--- Page 370 ---



--- Page 371 ---

This I speak to You, Mazda, may You tell this learner,

What misfortune ( happens ) to the vicious and what good

tothe upholder of rectitude. That apostle would prosper,

who can explain to the disciples ( on learning from You ),



--- Page 372 ---

so that he may

The Prophet wants to know the truth,

preach it.

That bliss, that you give to the heros ( martyrs ) through
your bright light, Mazda, to them, pierced with iron, it
gives the proof of the. existence of two selves (Mind and

Soul). Repel the vicious and tend the virtuous.



--- Page 373 ---

Consciousness falls into two parts ; witnessing conscious-

ness ( soul ) and witnessed consciousness.

The Soul is ever delightful. It is ot he mind which

is affected by outward circumstances,



--- Page 374 ---

y from this, Mazda,

And the man who misleads me, awa

isthe son of Lie. They are the malefactors,

he,
all those that there are, Hasten to me rectitude which is

your great blessing.



--- Page 375 ---

Do not hear the advice of those who deprecate religion.

They do more harm to you than anybody else by their mis-

leading doctrines.



--- Page 376 ---

Which man © Mazda, is the friend of Spitama Zara-
t

thushtra? And who communes with Rectitude 7 Which

is holy Faith and which one, well-wisher of this Church,

has understood (the implications of) Conscience ?



--- Page 377 ---

That beatitude, the wavering Kavis do not attain even
hereafter, which state aécrues to Spitana Zarathushtra even

now. For in his strength, he verily is victor over both

the mobile and the immobile (i.e, over all)—they cannot

sway him.



--- Page 378 ---

Evil-doers really pervert the faith of the innocent. The

souls of such evil-doers, having by their deeds and words

strayed away from the path of rectitude, tremble therefore
at the Chinvat bridge.



--- Page 379 ---

The Karpas, destroyers of the harmony of the world by

Evil acts blunt the finer susceptibilites of a man and their deeds and words do not turn (pay heed ) to rules

he is gradually reduced to a brute,



--- Page 380 ---



--- Page 381 ---

That dispensation (System), which Zarathushtra subse-

quently taught to the Maghavats (Members of the Magha

Church); is what Ahura Mazda had previously imparted

in the House of Song (Heaven). Do ye acquire that, by

Love, helped on by Conscience and Rectitude.



--- Page 382 ---



--- Page 383 ---

The religion that Zarathushtra teaches has been inspired
by Mazda Himself. It is a life af Love for Mazda, sancti-

fied by Conscience and Rectitude.

God Himself taught Theosophy, which 1 grea

of all sciences, to Atharva, His foremost son.

Love of God is the highest religion.



--- Page 384 ---

That ( Chisti), Kava Vistaspa adopted, to the great

prowess of this Magha (Church), which (Theosophy-Sufism)

Rectitude formulates, through the steps of Conscience. Holy

Mazda Ahura, may You teach us our good.



--- Page 385 ---



--- Page 386 ---

noble corporation, which I desire for the sake of this grand
religion. May almighty Ahura Mazda hold on. I yearn for

the advent of rectitude...

Hugva Frashoshtra has displayed (built up) unto me, a



--- Page 387 ---

Hugya Adhi-Yamaspa ( Yamaspa the great, of Hugva

clan ), adept in Conscience, chooses through rectitude.

this Cisti ( Theosophy ), and this detachment, for attaining
the goal. Grant unto me, O Ahura Mazda, that which

is Thy pleasure,



--- Page 388 ---



--- Page 389 ---



--- Page 390 ---

That man, Spitama Madbyamasa, ( Maidyomaha ) profi-

cient in religion, has done this much for me, that to the
seckers of the Higher Self; he declared, the betterment

of ihe world by deeds, to be the Law of Mazda.



--- Page 391 ---

We would therefore all, in-equal delight, offer our love

to you, adoring and saluting Rectitude and Conscience, and

that, which is praiseworthy Faith. O Mazda, kindle ecstacy

(in us),



--- Page 392 ---

Man is a social animal. Fellowship with his brothers, even

inthe matter of offering love to Ged, brings him additional

joy.



--- Page 393 ---

The man of Faith is holy. He is Cisti ( Theosoph-Sufi )

in words and deeds—adorning Rectitude by religion, and



--- Page 394 ---



--- Page 395 ---

They who, for my sake (out of regard for me), on
account of ( exuberance of ) Rectitude, turn fully (i. e. are
attracted ) to my ( mode of ) worship, O Mazda Ahura, I

would know them (all of them ), who were and who are.

I would honour them by their own names ( each one by his

name ), and loving them, I would serve them.



--- Page 396 ---

Magha or the National Church binds all of us together

—the past generation, the present generation and the future

generation. The Magha is dear to all of them, and through

the Magha they are dear to one another. Let all of them
be remembered on the day of festivity.



--- Page 397 ---

The greatest aspiration of Spitama Zarathushtra has been

heard ( granted ); because to him, on account of his Recti-

tude, Ahura Mazda has allotted, as his remuneration, the

highest life for all time, Those who used to taunt him,
have begun to follow him, in words and deeds, for the sake

of the grand religion,



--- Page 398 ---



--- Page 399 ---

May they now attain by their thoughts, words and deeds,
the Bliss of Mazda, the Brahma ( Transcendental ) ; and may

they—Kava Vistaspa, Spitama Zarathushtri and Frashoshtra—

choose this worship. Follow the straight path, which Reli-

gion, Ahura the great Shoshyant ( Yogin ) has prescribed.



--- Page 400 ---



--- Page 401 ---



--- Page 402 ---

of the clan of Haechad-aspa, a noble lady

family, such one as youm—the daughter of

iddicted to Consetence Rectitude and
(all people ) hold you, as the head
‘ model ) for all of them. So'rejoice in your duties and earn

the best boons



--- Page 403 ---



--- Page 404 ---

Him do 1 long for and Him do I choose, who plays the

father and the husband to the worker and the Khaetu

( Vaisya—common people ) to the saint and the class of

saints. Perfecting the conscience, He would reveal to me
the great Swan.( supreme Soul, or Paramatma ). May Ahura

Mazda subsist for the grand Religion for all time to come.



--- Page 405 ---



--- Page 406 ---



--- Page 407 ---



--- Page 408 ---

I tell these words, both to the elder and to the younger
Pender over these. You, who are prac-

n, learn what the life ( essence’) of Conscience

Let Rectitude protect one another. That is for all,

the good measure ( limit of



--- Page 409 ---

“Do to others, as you would that they should do to you”,

isthe golden rule of ethics, The same truth is expressed

here in the negative way : “Do not do to others that which
you would that they would not do to you.”
Equity is the yard-stick, the common standard, which

none may discard.



--- Page 410 ---

In this base world, O men and women, know self-control
to be the true rescue. Indulgence in vice leads to the utter

ruin of the soul. In the vain and the vicious law-burners

( debauches ), evil thoughts tarnish the holiness. Thus they

kill the moral life.



--- Page 411 ---

Then alone shall yours be the reward for this Discipline,
when you cast off, far and wide, the heart~seated lust, which

isthe root ofall passions and wherein the strength of the

Devil mostly resides. Practise this Discipline. Otherwise,

“woe” shall be your words in thevend,



--- Page 412 ---



--- Page 413 ---

Lust is the greatest enemy of man, the root of all the
passions. As soon as one purges himself of this canker,

he reaches the presence of Mazda.

Ifthe mind burns for another's wife, how can one get

to higher life ?



--- Page 414 ---

That-way, let the evil-deers be destroyed and let all

those who redicule, bewail. This-way, on account of their

good Nonchalance, may He give knowledge-way, action-

way and feelingway (cognition, volition and conation) to
the ascetics and the householders. Let the deceitful fiend

run away. Let utmost ruin befall him, and that, quickly.



--- Page 415 ---

No’one is immune from the jealousy ( sternness ) of God.

The jealousy is due to His uniqueness.



--- Page 416 ---

The evil-doers, hedonists, virtue-burners and soul-killers

oppress very much this Thy Prince of Raji. Where is the

Righteous Lord who will relieve them of their licence and
caprice ? This is your Kshathra (sovereignty), Mazda, that

to the righteous and pure, You grant the better life.



--- Page 417 ---

Mazda, as the upholder of moral order, is sure to

His support to Zarathushtra and to punish his enemies, The

punishment would, however, be tor their own good—to lead

them to the path of rectitude,

Why ould God, who is all kindness, inflict punish-

ment on anybody, unless i



--- Page 418 ---



--- Page 419 ---



--- Page 420 ---

The mill of God grinds slow, but grinds exceeding small.

Hafiz also relies on the protection of the Prince of Raji.
}

Take your plaint to the Prince of Rai, for the whole
world would unite in adoring the first and the formost

of all the Prophets.

All will turn to thee

tathushtra )

Woxathushera ta mother to we. Heis ther+a m is mother to me, He is father to me. Zara~

thushtra is my friend, He is my beloved. Zarathushtra is my

&

all-in-all. I do not know any one else, none else | know,—

hone.

